1	Accounting			2	ACC 201	Introduction to Financial Accounting	4	"An accelerated introduction to accounting theory, including the nature and need for accounting principles and accounting concepts. Coverage includes financial statement preparation and analysis, internal control, and accounting systems."3	ACC 205	Managerial Accounting	4	"Controller use of accounting data to assist with decisions on budgeting, factor and product combinations, pricing, and for performance evaluation of segments of the firm.  Prerequisites: ACC 201, MAT 111 or equivalents, or permission of instructor."4	ACC 310	Income Tax I	4	"Analysis of federal income tax legislation and IRS interpretations affecting individuals' returns.  This includes analysis of accounting methods used to determine gross income, deductions, capital gains/losses, and business income.  Also includes instruction on availability and use of tax services.  Prerequisite: ACC 201 or equivalent."5	ACC 311	Income Tax II	4	"Impact of federal tax legislation and IRS regulation on taxation of corporations, partnerships, estates and trusts.  Special attention is given capital gains/losses, normal tax and surtax, income and deductions of domestic and international/multinational organizations.  Prerequisite:  ACC 310 or equivalent."6	ACC 312	Accounting Systems & Computer Applications	3	"Introduces students to topics in the area of accounting information systems.  In addition to gaining exposure to commercially used accounting packages, students will gain an understanding of system documentation techniques including data flow diagrams, flowcharting, and E-R diagrams; internal control design and assessment; database design; information acquisition; and transactional accounting systems and accounting cycles.  Prerequisite:  ACC 201 or equivalent and computer literacy."7	ACC 370	Cost Accounting	3	"Cost accounting and related analytical concepts.  Topics include cost accumulation, variance analysis, joint costs, and standard costing.  Prerequisite: ACC 201 or equivalent."8	ACC 385	Intermediate Accounting I	4	"An advanced theory course in accounting, including problems in corporation accounting, evaluation of items on the balance sheet, and statement of income. The course emphasizes the opinions, statements, and other current publications of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the Financial Accounting Standards Board. Prerequisite: ACC 201 or equivalent."9	ACC 386	Intermediate Accounting II	4	"Continuation of Intermediate Accounting I. Topics include Stockholder's Equity and more complex accounting topics, including  accounting for pensions, leases and income taxes, and the Statement of Cash Flows.  Prerequisite: ACC 385 or equivalent."10	ACC 450	Auditing	4	Auditing standards and techniques used in audit engagements; preparation of audit working papers and audit reports.  Prerequisite: ACC 386 or equivalent.11	ACC 475	Advanced Accounting Problems	4	"Advanced accounting problems cover partnerships, home office and branch relationships, fiduciary accounting, governmental and institutional units, consolidated financial statements, corporate mergers and acquisitions, and other advanced problems.  Prerequisite:  ACC 386 or equivalent."12	ACC 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned.  Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."13	ACC 492	Accounting Internship	4	"Supervised, discipline related experience in a business organization.  Emphasis is on application, process, and techniques used by business to sustain business and promote growth.  Specific skills and competencies needed to be a successful decision-maker will be targeted.  Oversight will be provided by the School internship coordinator and the sponsoring organization.  Periodic meetings with the supervisor, mid-semester evaluation, and a final, comprehensive written report are required.  Prerequisite:  Permission of instructor."14	Anthropology			15	ANT 250	Consumerism and Social Justice	4	"Explores consumption by considering its place in society, the impact of markets and branding on adults and children, consumer identity, the differences between free and fair trade, global trade, food supplies, and the potential links between shopping and social justice. "16	ANT 270	Anthropology of Popular Culture	4	"Anthropological perspectives will be used to examine the role of mass media and popular culture in everyday life in the United States. We will explore various forms of popular culture, and how race, ethnicity, class, and sexual orientation are expressed and negotiated in mass media that pervades everyday life. Some topics that will be addressed include: film, music, television, the Internet, food, consumerism, branding, celebrity, deviance, and the meaning of “cool.”"17	ANT 280	Refugee Cultures in the U.S.	4	"Refugees are people who have fled their home countries due to war, ethnic or religious conflict, or other problems, and are not able to return for fear of persecution. The United States has welcomed refugee groups from many countries and helped them find new homes and communities throughout the country. This course uses a multidisciplinary approach from anthropology to address the history, adaptation, and resettlement experiences of refugee cultures in the U.S. A mix of video, books, news articles, discussions, and optional field trips will be used. An emphasis will be placed on personal stories and experiences from resettled refugee men and women. "18	ANT 301	General Anthropology	4	"Examines the general characteristics of a holistic cultural approach.  Presents a general theory of human cultural development.  Places specific anthropological issues, such as the origin of gender roles, inequality, and the nature of the state, in theoretical and cross-cultural perspective.  Integrates data from cultural anthropology, linguistics, biological anthropology, archaeology, and applied anthropology research and practices where appropriate.  Designed for upper division students with no previous background in anthropology.  Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."19	ANT 303	Cultural Diversity	4	"Examines the nature of social and cultural systems of diversity.  Investigates cultural practices Relevant to the constitution of such social constructs as race, class, gender and sexuality.  Emphasizes the processes through which such ideas, products and culturally and historically constructed social worlds, become parts of a taken-for-granted social universe.  Integrates the relationship between conceptions of race, class and gender and sociological and anthropological practice.  Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."20	ANT 310	Introduction to Cultural Anthropology	4	"Provides an understanding of contemporary human issues through the study of diverse human cultures, with an emphasis on non-Western societies and practices. Basic concepts and ethnographic techniques practiced by cultural anthropologist are presented. Topics include family, language, kinship, health, gender, economics, politics, ecology, art and religion. Examination of issues such as globalization and the study of online communities and cultures. "21	ANT 321	"Distinction: Race, Class and Gender"	4	"Examines the nature of social and cultural systems of distinction.  Investigates cultural practices relevant to the constitution of such social constructs as race, class, gender and sexuality.  Emphasizes the processes through which such ideas, products of culturally and historically constructed social worlds, become parts of a taken-for-granted social universe.  Integrates the relationship between conceptions of race, class and gender and sociological and anthropological practice.  Prerequisite: ANT 301 or SOC 110, or an introductory anthropology or sociology course.  Restricted to Sociology and Criminal Justice majors."22	ANT 382	"Cultures, Health and Healing"	4	"Presents the essential elements of a cultural perspective through examination of health and illness-related behavior.  Places disease and illness in holistic perspective.  Explores specific issues in medical anthropology, such as the way various cultures conceive disease and illness, cross-cultural conflict in health care delivery, industrial and non-industrial approaches to therapeutic intervention, the relationship of disease and human evolution, and alternative approaches to the study of such issues.  Assumes no previous study in anthropology, although this would be helpful.  Prerequisite:  ANT 301 or SOC 110 or an introductory anthropology or sociology course. "23	ANT 460	Ethnography	4	"Provides an intensive survey of ethnographic practice in anthropology, sociology, and other fields.  Examines a wide range of ethnographic materials focusing on the actual production of ethnographic materials including the use of ""participant observation,"" the collection and making of the ethnographic text, questions of ethics in field work practice, and recent relevant feminist and postmodern discussions. Provides students' with the skills and information required in fieldwork practice.  Covers specific projects that require students to generate primary field data and complete an analysis of this data using one or several of the theoretical perspectives covered during the semester.  Prerequisite:  ANT 301 or SOC 110 or an introductory anthropology or sociology course.  Cross listed with ANT 531."24	ANT 490	Selected Topics in Anthropology	4	An in-depth treatment of a selected topic in Anthropology.  Provides students with the opportunity to investigate Anthropological subject matter that will not be repeated in a future seminar.  Prerequisites:  ANT 301 or SOC 110 or an introductory anthropology or sociology course.  25	ANT 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisite: Matriculated student only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."26	Art			27	ART 110	Principles of Two Dimensional Design	4	"A foundation studio course focusing on the visual dynamics of the two-dimensional picture plane, with special attention on the application of basic design principles to problem-solving in the fine and applied arts.  Explores a variety of hands-on techniques pertaining to image creation, manipulation, and construction including space, line, shape, value, texture, color, and their design relation to one another.  Combining technical and artistic skills, students will create 5-8 portfolio pieces.  Meets General Education The Arts requirement."28	ART 120	Studio Art: Visual and/or Performing	2	An introduction and hands-on experience with the style and techniques of a visiting artist. Suitable lecture/demonstration of background and personal approach to the work will be shared by the artist. Students in a studio/workshop type of environment will participate in sequential exercises designed to allow them adopt and adapt some of those stylistic elements and/or features in their own work (visual and/or performing). Meets new General Education Arts requirement.29	ART 135	Drawing	2	"This is a beginning course in freehand drawing for the layperson.  The student will be guided through a sequence of lessons beginning with line quality, the vocabulary of lines, and proceed through drawing materials and techniques, foreshortening and shading. Emphasis will be placed on the representation of forms in drawing. Lessons will consist of lecturedemonstrations, class work, and homework.  The expected result is to provide the student with more confidence in the selfexpression and appreciation of drawing.  Meets new General Education Arts requirement."30	 			31	ART 140	Painting  Technique & Style	4	"An investigation of visual art forms and techniques that influence and express qualities of American culture.  Aspects of design, color and style will be explored through studio experience, lecture, slides, and demonstrations, to enable the student to use the elements of line and color to create visual space on a flat surface.  Meets new General Education Arts requirement."32	ART 341	Painting II - Techniques & Style	2	"Continuation of the investigation of visual art forms and techniques for students who wish to improve visual literacy.  Students will explore several major styles in the modern Western tradition, applying and experimenting with the brush and pigment techniques through which those styles are achieved.  Meets new General Education Arts requirement."33	ART 350	History of American Art	4	"A survey of important trends and significant styles of American painting and sculpture from colonial times, including works of Sargent, Whistler, Homer, Inness, Johns, and Pollock.  Lectures, slides, and museum tours.  Meets new General Education Humanities or Arts requirement."34	Astronomy			35	AST 222	Astronomy	4	"A survey of the nature of celestial bodies within the solar system, as well as constellations and phenomena in and beyond our galaxy.  Also covered are comets, meteoroids, asteroids, black holes, quasars, pulsars, supernovae, star clusters, and double stars.  Meets new General Education Natural Sciences requirement."36	Biology			37	BIO 101T	Introduction to Biology Lecture	3	"Biological issues are at the forefront of public attention, from cloning to climate change to conservation, and understanding these issues takes an increasing amount of scientific literacy as the issues become more complex.  Covers the scientific knowledge base behind many of these issues, and also explores current areas of agreement and contention and applications of these data in technology and society.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course BIO 101L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 101T and BIO 101L) is required.  Students may NOT receive degree credit for both BIO 101T/L and BIO 103T/L or 104T/l. Meets new General Education Natural Science requirement. "38	BIO 101L	Introduction to Biology Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany BIO 101T.  Application of theoretical material from Introduction to Biology Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course BIO 101T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 101T and BIO 101L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Students may NOT receive degree credit for both BIO 101T/L and BIO 103T/L or 104T/L. Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."39	BIO 103T	Biology I Lecture	3	"First part of a two semester sequence of introductory biology.  Focuses on chemistry of living organisms, cell structure and function, metabolic processes, genetics and evolution.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course BIO 103L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 103T and BIO 103L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.   Students may NOT receive degree credit for both BIO 101T/L and BIO 103T/L.   Meets new General Education Natural Science requirement. "40	BIO 103L	Biology 1 Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany BIO 103T.  Application of theoretical material from Biology 1 Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course BIO 103T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 103T and BIO 103L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category.  Students may NOT receive degree credit for both BIO 101T/L and BIO 103T/L."41	BIO 104T	Biology II Lecture	3	"Second part of a two semester sequence of introductory biology.  Focuses on the diversity, anatomy, and physiology of living organisms.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course BIO 104L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 104T and BIO 104L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Prerequisites: BIO 103T and BIO 103L or equivalent.  Students may NOT receive degree credit for both BIO 101T/L and BIO 104T/L."42	BIO 104L	Biology II Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany BIO 104T.  Application of theoretical material from Biology II Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course BIO 104T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 104T and BIO 104L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Prerequisites: BIO 103T and BIO 103L or equivalent. Students may NOT receive degree credit for both BIO 101T/L and BIO 104T/L."43	BIO 105	Introduction to Ecology	4	"Study of interactions living organisms have with their physical and biological environments. Special attention is given to population dynamics, pollution control, and the consequences when ecological systems are disturbed.  Meets new General Education Natural Science requirement."44	BIO 106	Solutions for a Sustainable World	4	"Examines a broad survey of environmental, social and economic problems and explores solutions for a sustainable future on local, bioregional and global levels. Topics include population growth and consumption, world poverty, global climate change, renewable energy, transportation and biofuels, water conservation, GMO’s, local and organic food production, green building, socially responsible business investing, carbon cap and trade, microlending, environmental racism, and ecovillages among others. The instructor, student teams and guest speakers will give presentations on these issues. Students will see examples of sustainable solutions in their local community on scheduled site visits. Meets new General Education Natural Science requirement. "45	BIO 130T	Plant Biology	3	"Plants provide us with oxygen, food, and most of the raw materials we use; they form the very basis of life as we know it.  Examines the structure, classification, and physiology of plants, and addresses current issues and technologies surrounding plants such as bioengineered food and botanical forensics.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course BIO 130L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 130T and BIO 130L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."46	BIO 130L	Plant Biology Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany BIO 130T.  Application of theoretical material from Plant Biology Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course BIO 130T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 130T and BIO 130L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."47	BIO 215T	Anatomy & Physiology I Lecture	3	"Covers organs and organ systems of the human body.  This course emphasizes the anatomy and physiology of cells and the integumentary, nervous, respiratory, and circulatory systems.  Three lecture hours per week.  This course must be taken with BIO 215L at SUNY Polytechnic during the same semester.  Prerequisites: BIO 101/101L or BIO 103/103L and CHE 110/110L or CHE 130/130L, or permission of the instructor.  Successful completion of both co-requisite courses (BIO 215T and BIO 215L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, s/he must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets the SUNY General Education Natural Science category."48	BIO 215L	Anatomy & Physiology 1 Lab	1	"Covers organs and organ systems of the human body in a laboratory setting.  This course emphasizes the anatomy and physiology of cells and the integumentary, nervous, respiratory, and circulatory systems.  Three laboratory hours per week.  This course must be taken with BIO 215 at SUNY Polytechnic during the same semester.   Prerequisites: BIO 101/101L or BIO 103/103L and CHE 110/110L or CHE 130/130L, or permission of the instructor.  Successful completion of both co-requisite courses (BIO 215T and BIO 215L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, s/he must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets the SUNY General Education Natural Science category."49	BIO 216T	Anatomy & Physiology II Lecture	3	"Covers organs and organ systems of the human body in a laboratory setting.  This course emphasized the anatomy and physiology of the skeletal, muscular, endocrine, digestive, urinary, and reproductive systems.  Three lecture hours per week.  This course must be taken with BIO 216L at SUNY Polytechnic during the same semester.  Prerequisites: BIO 215/215L or permission of the instructor.  Successful completion of both co-requisite courses (BIO 216T and BIO 216L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, s/he must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets the SUNY General Education Natural Science category."50	BIO 216L	Anatomy & Physiology II Laboratory	1	"Covers organs and organ systems of the human body in a laboratory setting.  This course emphasizes the anatomy and physiology of the skeletal, muscular, endocrine, digestive, urinary, and reproductive systems.  Three laboratory hours per week. This course must be taken with BIO 216 at SUNY Polytechnic during the same semester.  Prerequisites: BIO 215/215L or permission of the instructor.  Successful completion of both co-requisite courses (BIO 216T and BIO 216L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, s/he must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets the SUNY General Education Natural Science category."51	BIO 222	Nutrition and Health	4	"Examines the nature of nutrients, their metabolism and physiological function, and the factors that may influence the degrees to which these nutrients are required for healthy functioning. Nutritional health issues and the influence of drugs and environmental factors on nutrition and health will be emphasized.  Meets new General Education Natural Science requirement."52	BIO 224	Biology of Aging	4	"Introduces biological concepts with emphasis on the process of aging. Topics include demographics, concepts of aging, anatomy and physiology as well as general nonmedical assessments of the elderly. Students cannot receive credit for both BIO 350 (Advanced Physiology) and BIO 224. Meets new General Education Natural Science requirement."53	BIO 225	Biology of the Sexes	4	"Examines the genetic and physiological basis of male and female differentiation in different organisms, the evolution of reproduction as a genetic strategy, physical differences of the sexes and parenting in mammals.  Addresses how societal constructs of gender have influenced the development of theories in various scientific disciplines and the roles of gender for scientists.  Meets new General Education Natural Science requirement."54	BIO 230	Plant Anatomy	4	"In-depth examination of the internal organization of plants, particularly angiosperms, with an emphasis on understanding anatomy from a structure-function standpoint.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory each week.  Prerequisites: BIO 104"55	BIO 250 	Medical Genetics	4	"Central concepts of genetics are explored and their clinical applications to multiple situations are defined. Also, information obtained from assessment processes are translated into practice, and ethical and practice principles and their use in the counseling of patients and families are discussed. Does not meet SUNY General Education Natural Science requirement. Prerequisites: BIO 215 and 216 or permission of the instructor. "56	BIO 270	Cell Biology	4	"Survey of modern cell biology which includes the chemistry of cellular molecules, structure, functions and specializations of cells and organelles.  Four hours of lecture each week.  Prerequisites: BIO 104"57	BIO 275T	Microbiology Lecture	3	"Covers the fundamentals of microbiology including the study of bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae and protozoa as well as microbial structure, metabolism, culturing, control and genetics.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course BIO 275L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 275T and BIO 275L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites. Prerequisites: BIO 101 or CHE 110 or equivalents, or permission of instructor."58	BIO 275L	Microbiology Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany BIO 275T course.  Application of theoretical material from Microbiology Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course BIO 275T in the same semester. Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 275T and BIO 275L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Prerequisites: BIO 101 and CHE 110 or equivalents, or permission of instructor."59	BIO 300T	Ecology Lecture	3	"Covers interactions at the organismal, population (single species and species interactions), and community level.  Applications of ecological theory to current environmental problems are examined throughout the course, and various statistical methods are used to analyze and interpret data.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course BIO 300L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 300T and BIO 300L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites."60	BIO 300L	Ecology Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany BIO 300T.  Application of theoretical material from Ecology Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course BIO 300T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (BIO 300T and BIO 300L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Prerequisites: BIO 104T and BIO 104L; STA 100 or STA 225 or MAT 225 or equivalents."61	BIO 315	Plant/Animal Physiology	4	"Examines functional responses of organisms such as photosynthesis, water relations, movement, hormones, and growth in plants and, in animals, the nervous, endocrine, circulatory, respiratory, digestive, and reproductive systems.  Four hours of lecture each week.  Prerequisite: BIO 270."62	BIO 340	Vertebrate Zoology	4	"Focuses on the biology, ecology, taxonomy and comparative anatomy of animals within the vertebrates.  Students will have “hands-on” experience with live and preserved specimens in the field and laboratory.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory each week.  Prerequisites: BIO 104."63	BIO 341	Invertebrate Zoology	4	"Focuses on the biology, ecology, taxonomy and comparative anatomy of animals within the invertebrate phylum.  Students will have “hands-on” experience with live and preserved specimens in the field and laboratory.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory each week.  Prerequisites: BIO 104."64	BIO 342	Animal Behavior	4	"Biological study of vertebrate and invertebrate animal behavior.  Basic topics covered include animal learning, mechanisms of behavior, foraging, competition, defense against predation, aggression, sensory systems, communication, mating systems and parental care behavior.  Four hours of lecture per week.  Prerequisites: BIO 104."65	BIO 350	Advanced Physiology	4	"An integrated study of human physiology at the biochemical, cellular, tissue, and organ level.  Designed primarily for upper division science and nursing majors.  Emphasis will be on explanation of biochemical and cellular mechanisms in the major organ systems of the human body. Prerequisite:  BIO 216 or permission of instructor.  "66	BIO 351	Genetics	4	"A broad coverage of the field of genetics to include discussion of the transmission, chemical nature and function of genetic material, with special attention to its importance in medicine, agriculture, and other aspects of human life and culture. Prerequisite: BIO 104 or permission of instructor."67	BIO 375	 Applied and Environmental Microbiology	4	"General principles and application of industrial and environmental microbiology focusing on useful microbial processes.  Investigate role of microbes in water pollution control, environmental health, element cycling in the environment, industrial applications, and biomedical applications.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites:  BIO 101 or BIO 103 and CHE 130.  "68	BIO 380	Evolution	4	"Introduction to evolutionary theory.  Includes the historical development of components of evolutionary theory, population level microevolution, the fossil record and macroevolution, and current methods in evolutionary research including their application to genetic engineering.  Meets new General Education Natural Science requirement. Prerequisite: BIO 104"69	BIO 390	Junior Seminar	1	"Introduction to the general principles and procedures of scientific research with emphasis on the use of scientific literature and methods of research.  Seminar, 1 hour each week.  Prerequisite: Junior status."70	BIO 401	Phylogenetics	4	"Introduces students to methodologies of reconstruction evolutionary history.  The history of various approaches is covered as well as current and emerging philosophical debates in the field.  Modern methods utilizing computational analysis will be taught along with specific issues regarding different types of data.  Prerequisites:  BIO 270, BIO 351, BIO 380"71	BIO 470	Molecular Biology	4	"Modern molecular biology with an emphasis on gene structure and activity and the biochemistry related to the understanding of the functions of the gene.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory each week.  Prerequisites: BIO 104, BIO 270"72	BIO 472	Oncology	4	"This course will provide an introduction to the field of cancer biology, covering how cancer develops from defects in genes that govern normal cell growth and death processes. Throughout the course, an emphasis will be placed on comparing the common cellular pathways that are deregulated across many cancer types, thus highlighting the pharmacological targets of current cancer therapies.  Also, a special section will cover the use of engineered nanomaterials for cancer prevention and novel treatment strategies.  After covering relevant introductory concepts, a review and research paper will be assigned to the class, with students taking the lead in a topical discussion of the research paper.  At least 1 week will be allowed for preparation.  Guidelines for how to best structure these discussions will be provided.  Prerequisites: BIO 270 and BIO 351 or equivalents.  "73	BIO 487	Senior Life Science Seminar	1	"A capstone seminar focusing on biology research conducted by seniors and faculty.  Seminar, 1 hour each week.  Prerequisites: BIO 390 and Senior status. "74	BIO 488	Senior Bioinformatics Seminar	1	"Capstone seminar focusing on bioinformatics research conducted by seniors and faculty.  Seminar, 1 hour each week.  Prerequisites: BIO 390 and Senior status. "75	BIO 489	Senior Biotechnology Seminar	1	"Capstone seminar focusing on biotechnology research conducted by seniors and faculty.  Seminar, 1 hour each week.  Prerequisites: BIO 390 and Senior status. "76	Business			77	BUS 101	Introduction to Business	4	"A survey course that will provide an introduction to current business practices in a changing global economy.  Includes an overview and introduction to the functional areas in American business such as accounting, finance, marketing, management, human resources, and production.  Selected business topics will be covered to illustrate how the concepts, structures, and theories are related within business.  Enrollment is restricted to freshmen/sophomore students or by permission of instructor."78	BUS 105	Business Law I	4	"A caseapproach analysis of business transactions in the legal environment.  Coverage includes:  court structure and processes, contracts, sales, commercial paper, secured transactions, and property transactions.  Related local, state, and federal statutes and forms are also considered."79	BUS 302	Web Analytics for Managers	2	"Focuses on the methods and concepts that today’s business managers can use to effectively manage their electronic commerce site activity.  Through gaining a better understanding of web analytics, managers become better informed of their company’s online activities, enabling them to improve their marketing, sales and profit results.  Examines the various ways that web activity is measured and analyzed, including the metrics that provide the essential data for analysis and the technologies that are used to track and report web activity."80	BUS 303	What’s the Big Idea	3	"Student will be introduced to how to develop an idea into an entrepreneurial vision. This will include conceptualizing and presenting an idea to potential team members and investors, focusing your idea, understanding competition and looking for missing opportunities in a market, learn how to form a team and financial planning to support your idea. This course and ITS 303 cannot both be taken for credit."81	BUS 304	Idea to Startup	3	"Students will develop an action plan for their business. This will include developing a plan to get your product to market, develop a proof of concept or demo, develop a business plan, which can be used to pitch your idea to investors, and refine the team which will help you get your idea to market. The culmination of the final project is a presentation to investors. This course and ITS 304 cannot both be taken for credit."82	BUS 306	Business Law II	3	"Designed to extend the student's legal knowledge of business transactions by stressing issue recognition and case analysis. Topics covered include agency, property, suretyship, legal liability, bankruptcy, and business organization.  Prerequisite: BUS 105."83	BUS 310	Principles of Insurance	4	"Introduction to basic principles of life, health, property, liability, and other forms of insurance from the viewpoint of the purchaser.  Emphasis will be on universal insurance concepts and not specific policy provisions.  Consideration is given to the importance of risk in personal and business transitions and various methods of handling risk with emphasis on insurance."84	BUS 345	Real Estate Transaction	4	"The principal purpose is to develop an understanding of the legal framework and basic principles that apply to real estate transactions.  Residential and commercial real estate transactions will be examined in detail.  Specific legal issues are presented in a problemsolving format and may include: introduction to real estate, recording statutes, title abstracting and title insurance, survey and legal descriptions, mortgages, leases, deeds of conveyance, settlements and closings and Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act."85	BUS 420	Employee Benefits	4	"Concepts of group life, health, retirement, and emerging employer sponsored benefit plans. Emphasis is on plan design and management with special attention to cost funding, regulation and tax considerations.  The impact of government programs such as Social Security on individual insurance and employee benefit programs and potential impact of proposals such as national health insurance. Prerequisite: MGT 318."86	BUS 451	Issues in Business and Society	4	"Analysis of forces external to the firm which influence its goals, structure and operation.  Includes legal and regulatory constraints, primarily as they reflect the philosophical backgrounds of free enterprise and managerial enterprise, and managerial enterprise viewpoints current in American business. Also, the social, political, and technological factors which influence managerial/nonmanagerial behavior in the firm, and the firm's impact on society.  Actual cases influencing the firm or industry objectives, and the philosophy of private enterprise will dominate the subject matter. "87	BUS 485	Management Policy	4	"Emphasis is placed upon analysis of the factors upon which ultimate business decisions are made; construction and review of business plans, and business strategies in domestic and foreign operations under varying political, economic and legal constraints.  Special attention is given to actual situation analysis.  Current functional and managerial techniques are applied to a variety of case problems. Prerequisites: Senior status and completion of all business core requirements."88	BUS 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites:  Matriculated students only; permission of instructor and dean of subject area."89	BUS 492	Business Internship	4	"Supervised, discipline based experience in business organization. Emphasis on application, process, and techniques used by business to sustain and promote growth. Specific skills and competencies needed to be a successful decision-maker are targeted. Oversight provided by the School internship coordinator and the sponsoring organization. Periodic meetings with the internship coordinator, mid-semester evaluation and a final, comprehensive written report are required. Pre-requisite: Permission of Instructor.   Only S/U grades are awarded for this course."90	Chemistry			91	CHE 110T	Essentials of Chemistry Lecture	3	"An introduction to chemistry for nonscience majors.  The course will cover some key topics in chemistry, with emphasis on its impact on society.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course CHE 110L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 110T and CHE 110L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category.  Students may NOT receive degree credit for both CHE 110T/L and CHE 130T/L or CHE 131T/L."92	CHE110L	Essentials of Chemistry Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany CHE 110T.  Application of theoretical material from Organic Chemistry 1 Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course CHE 110T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 110T and CHE 110L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."93	CHE 130T	Introductory Chemistry I Lecture	3	"First course in two semester sequence of introductory chemistry for students in the sciences or related programs.  Topics include: measurements, forms of matter, stoichiometry, chemical reactions, gases, thermochemistry, atomic structure, structure of the periodic table, chemical bonding and molecular geometry, properties of solids and liquids, and properties of solutions.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course CHE 130L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 130T and CHE 130L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Students may NOT receive degree credit for both CHE 110T/L and CHE 130T/L.  Restricted to Biology, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering majors."94	CHE 130L	Introductory Chemistry 1 Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany CHE 130T.  Application of theoretical material from Introductory Chemistry Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course CHE 130T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 130T and CHE 130L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites. Restricted to Biology, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering majors.  "95	CHE 131T	Introductory Chemistry II Lecture	3	"Second course in a two semester sequence of college-level introductory chemistry for students in the sciences or related technology programs.  Topics include: periodic patterns in the chemical table, organic compounds, chemical kinetics, equilibria, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, elemental occurrence in nature and usage in industry, coordination compounds and lastly, nuclear chemistry. Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course CHE 131L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 131T and CHE 131L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Students may NOT receive degree credit for both CHE 110T/L and CHE 131 T/L.   Restricted to Biology, Civil Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering majors. Pre-requisites: CHE 130T and CHE 130L or equivalent. "96	CHE 131L	Introductory Chemistry II Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany CHE 131T.  Application of theoretical material from Introductory Chemistry II Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course CHE 131T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 131T and CHE 131L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisite.  Prerequisites: CHE 130T and CHE 130L or equivalent. Restricted to Biology, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering majors."97	CHE 230T	Organic Chemistry I Lecture	3	"First course in two semester sequence.  Topics include: Bonding and molecular orbital theory, structures of non-conjugated organic compounds, nomenclature, stereochemistry, basic organic reactions, structural determinations via infrared spectroscopy (IR), mass spectrometry (MS), and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) and basic synthetic approaches.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course CHE 230L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 230T and CHE 230L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Prerequisites: CHE 131T and CHE 131L or equivalent."98	CHE 230L	Organic Chemistry I Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany CHE 230T.  Application of theoretical material from Organic Chemistry I Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course CHE 230T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 230T and CHE 230L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Restricted to Biology majors.  Prerequisites: CHE 131T and CHE 131L or equivalent."99	CHE 231T	Organic Chemistry II Lecture	3	"Second semester of a two semester sequence.  Topics include:  Conjugated and aromatic organic compounds, ultraviolet/visible spectroscopy, reactions of aromatic compounds, alcohols, thiols, ethers, epoxides, sulfides, aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, reactions of carbonyl compounds, aliphatic and aromatic amines, nomenclature, basic synthetic approaches and an introduction to biological molecules.  Three hours of each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course CHE 231L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 231T and CHE 231L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Restricted to Biology majors.  Prerequisites: CHE 230T and CHE 230L or equivalent."100	CHE 231L	Organic Chemistry II Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany CHE 231T.  Application of theoretical material from Organic Chemistry II Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course CHE 231T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 231T and CHE 231L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Restricted to Biology majors.  Prerequisites: CHE 230T and CHE 230L or equivalent. "101	CHE 330	Instrumental Analysis	4	"Analytical chemistry course that deals with chemical analysis utilizing electronic instrumentation.  Topics include: infrared, Raman, atomic emission, atomic absorption, atomic fluorescence, NMR and mass spectrometry; electrochemical techniques such as ion selective electrodes, polarography, coulometry, amperometry, conductance; and chromatographic techniques such as gas, liquid column and HPLC.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory each weeks.  Prerequisite: CHE 231 or equivalent. "102	CHE 430T	Biochemistry I Lecture	3	"First course in a two semester sequence.  Topics include: Molecular components of the cell such as amino acids, proteins, enzymes, sugars, lipids, lipoproteins, nucleotides, vitamins and coenzymes.  Also covered are energy yielding processes such as the ATP cycle, glycolsis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, the phosphogluconate pathway, redox enzymes and electron transport, oxidative phosphorylation, fatty acid metabolism, amino acid degradation and photosynthesis.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course CHE 430L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 430T and CHE 430L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Restricted to Biology majors.  Prerequisites: CHE 231T and CHE 231L or equivalent. "103	CHE 430L	Biochemistry I Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany CHE 430T.  Application of theoretical material from Organic Chemistry II Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course CHE 430T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (CHE 430T and CHE 430L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Restricted to Biology majors.  Prerequisites:  CHE 231T and CHE 231L or equivalent."104	CHE 431	Biochemistry II	4	"Second course in a two semester sequence.  Topics include: synthesis of carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids and nucleotides, the conversion of biochemical energy into motility, membrane transport mechanisms, hormones and the regulation of metabolic processes, metabolic organization, the structure and properties of DNA, protein synthesis, genes and their regulation and systematic morphogenesis.  Three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: CHE 430T and CHE 430L or equivalent "105	Chinese			106	CHI 101	Elementary Chinese	4	"Designed for students with no previous knowledge of Chinese.  Introduces students to the official Chinese language called “Mandarin” by English speakers, putonghua in the People’s Republic of China, and Kuo-yu in Taiwan.  The course aims to help students obtain the four basic language skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing the Chinese language.  Students will learn basic vocabulary and sentence structures for use in essential daily-life situations through various forms of oral practice.  Pinyin (the most widely-used Chinese phonetic system) will be taught as a tool to learn the spoken language.  Students will also learn Chinese characters.  Approximately 200 words and expressions in both Pinyin and character forms will be taught.  While linguistic aspects of the Chinese language are the primary focus, introduction to the social and cultural background of the language will also form an important part of the course.  Meets the new General Education Foreign Language requirement."107	Civil Engineering			108	CE 210	Elementary Surveying	3	"Introductory course in surveying methods and theory. Topics will include land surveying, construction surveying, and route surveying. Two hours of lecture and two hours of lab per week. Prerequisites: MAT 151."109	CE 220	Professionalism	2	"Provides students with the non-technical skills necessary to become a member of the engineering profession. Class topics will include ethics, peer review and critiquing others, oral presentations, written reports, engineering impacts on society, guidance for licensure, and contemporary issues in engineering. Two hours of lecture per week. Prerequisite: Sophomore Standing."110	CE 301	Structural Engineering	4	"Introduce students to the classic analysis methods of determinate and indeterminate structures, including deflection, calculation of beams and frames, work energy methods, flexibility method, slope deflection method, moment distribution method, approximate structural analysis, and influence line concept for moving loads.  Three hours of lecture and one hour of lab per week.  Prerequisite: ESC 230. Restricted to Civil Engineering major."111	CE 302	Transportation Engineering	3	"Introduction to basic concepts in transportation engineering including: planning, design, and operations. Introduces the challenges and issues in modeling transportation problems. Studies of various concepts related to the design of highway facilities, level of service, and demand for transportation services. Concepts related to signal optimization, policy implications and the basics of transportation planning. Prerequisite: MAT 152."112	CE 303	Environmental Engineering	4	"Students in the class will be introduced to topics relevant to environmental engineering.  Topics to be covered in class include pollution in air, water and solid wastes, as well as, engineering approaches for treatment and remediation of the pollution in these environmental media.  Three hours of lecture and one hour of lab per week. Prerequisites: MAT 151 and BIO 101T, and BIO 101L or CHE 130T and CHE 130L. Restricted to Civil Engineering major."113	CE 304	Geotechnical Engineering	3	"Soil properties, identification and classification of earth material; subsurface exploration; soil strength, stresses, settlement, substructure design; computer applications. Prerequisites/co-requisites: ESC 230."114	CE 330	Fluid Mechanics	3	"Hydraulic considerations for wells, pumps, and distribution systems, including conservation of mass, momentum, and energy incompressible flow of fluids with introduction of compressible flow: dimensional analysis and similitude; laminar and turbulent flows; empirical methods. Hydrologic design and analysis of drainage. Hydrologic cycle components necessary for determining design flows. Use of computer analysis techniques. Prerequisite: CHE 231T and CHE 231L or equivalent."115	CE 335	Water Resources Engineering	3	"Students will explore water resources engineering processes in pipe flows, pipe networks, open channel flow, and surface and groundwater hydrology. This course is designed to review the fundamentals and practices of water resources engineering with a focus on engineering applications of hydraulics and hydrology. The concepts of fluid mechanics (hydrostatics, conservation laws) will be applied to analyze flow phenomena are illustrated in demonstrations and field trips. The course will prepare interested students for future careers in water supply, wastewater treatment, floodplain management, storm water management, and groundwater management. Prerequisite/Co-requisite: CE 330."116	CE 410	Structural Steel Design	3	"Analysis and design of structural steel members for tensile, compressive, flexural and combined loading. Prerequisite: CE 301."117	CE 411	Reinforced Concrete Design	3	"Strength design concepts, beams, columns, slabs, retaining walls, single and combined footings. Computer applications. Prerequisite: CE 301."118	CE 412	   Finite Element Analysis	3	"Modern analysis techniques used to investigate a variety of systems in engineering and science.  Computational models of problems are developed using energy concepts, structural mechanics, and matrix operations.  The methods used are implemented using a general finite element program and the accuracy of the results is evaluated.  The learned theoretical approach is applied to common structural elements such as trusses, beams, frames, and plates.  Prerequisites: ESC 230, MAT 260, and MAT 253."119	CE 420	Traffic Engineering	3	"Teaches students the fundamentals of traffic engineering and traffic flow theory: traffic signal design, intersection design, and traffic impact studies. Students will be taught using Highway Capacity Software, SYNCHRO, and other traffic software packages. Prerequisite: CE 302."120	CE 421	Highway Engineering	3	"Principles of geometric design of highways, intersections, interchanges, and terminals. Practical issues of vertical and horizontal curvature, highway evaluation, driver and vehicle dynamics, and traffic safety are also addressed. Computer-aided design and modeling. Prerequisite: CE 302."121	CE 422	Transportation Terminal Design	3	"Transportation terminal design requires that engineers look at the interactions between passengers, freight and the transportation systems that they use. The design of terminals is a key component of a transportation system. Terminals are designed to provide security, storage, and access to different modes of transportation. The course will focus on airports, rail stations and truck terminals. Prerequisite: CE 302."122	CE 430	Hydrology and Storm Water Management	3	Students will learn about hydrologic design and the analysis of drainage and storm water management systems. This will include hydrologic cycle components necessary for determining design flows and pipe flow calculations. Computer modeling. Prerequisite: CE 303.123	CE 431	Hazardous and Solid Waste Treatment	3	"Teaches students about hazardous and solid waste including: waste identification, subsurface fate and transport, toxicology, environmental/public health and risk assessment, site characterization and assessment tools, remediation tools and technologies. Prerequisite: CE 303."124	CE 432	Water & Waste Water Unit Design	3	"Design-based environmental engineering course. Unites design of drinking water and waste-water treatment plants. Applies microbiology, water chemistry principles, and units of treatment-plant design techniques. Prerequisite: CE 303."125	CE 433 	Groundwater Hydrology	3	"Students will learn the fundamental science and engineering behind groundwater systems. Explore hydrogeology topics including but not limited to: the hydrologic cycle, groundwater flow, and wellhead protection and management. Students are required to analyze contemporary issues in hydrogeology via critical thinking, engineering design, and teamwork, technical reporting, and presentation. Prerequisite: CE 303."126	CE 440	Construction Management	3	"Provides students with an overview of the responsibilities and risk associated with management within the construction industry. Emphasis is given to responsibilities and relationships between owners, contractors, labor and suppliers, construction estimates and schedules, construction contracts and safety. "127	CE 480	Capstone Design I	3	"This course will provide students with the opportunity to work as part of a multi-disciplinary Civil Engineering design team. The course will consist of developing the preliminary design plans with presentations and reports. Students will learn about the regulatory process, LEED design, and site planning. Lectures in professional practice and teaming will augment the design project. Prerequisites/co-requisites: Senior standing and completion of one class in a CE emphases."128	CE 481	Capstone Design II	3	"This course will provide students with the opportunity to work as part of a multi-disciplinary Civil Engineering design team. The course will consist of a design project with presentations and reports. Lectures in professional practice and teaming will augment the design project. Prerequisites/Co-requisites: Senior standing, successful completion of CE 480 and completion of one of the CE emphases."129	Civil Engineering Technology			130	CTC 101	Introduction to Engineering Technology	2	"Required for all freshmen in Civil Engineering Technology.  Topics include academic requirements, advisement, software packages, career opportunities, and project management. Additional topics include professional, ethical and social responsibilities; respect for diversity and a knowledge of contemporary professional, societal and global issues; and a commitment to quality, timeliness and continuous improvement.   Cross listed with MTC 101."131	CTC 162	Computer Aided Design	4	The use of AutoCAD software to develop geothermic models for engineering technology applications.  Blue print reading and basic drawing fundamentals.  Basic geometric dimensioning and tolerancing. Introduction to the creation and visualization of three-dimensional models.  Four hours of lecture per week.  Laboratory activity will be substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Cross –listed with MTC 162.132	CTC 212	Microstation	2	"Basics of CAD as applied to civil engineering technology using Microstation software for typical civil technology applications such as:  structures design drawings, highway layouts, detailing, etc. One hour of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  Basic understanding of geometry and trigonometry."133	CTC 213	AutoCAD	2	"A refresher course in the basics of AutoCAD as applied to civil engineering technology using AutoCAD software for typical civil technology applications such as:  structural design drawings and details, highway layouts, etc.  One hour of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week."134	CTC 215	Sustainable Energy Systems	2	"An introduction to sustainable energy systems.  Topics include solar energy, wind energy, wind energy, fuel cell technology, biomass energy, geothermal energy, clean coal technology, ocean energy, hydroelectric power, and nuclear power.  Two hours of lecture per week.  Cross-listed with ETC 215 and MTC 215"135	CTC 218	Statics	2	"Analysis of equivalent systems of forces, free body diagrams, equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies, centroids, friction, and forces in structures.  Two hours of lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Prerequisites:  PHY 101T, PHY 101L and MAT 120.  Cross listed with MTC 218."136	CTC 222	Strength of Materials	2	"Effect of shape and composition on strength of materials.  Moments of inertia, shear forces and bending moments in beams, torsion of shafts, thermal expansion, and pressure vessels.  Two hours lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Prerequisites:  PHY 101T, PHY 101L, MAT 120 and CTC 218.  Cross listed with MTC 222."137	CTC 240	Civil Materials and Testing	2	"Course covers properties and testing of common materials used in the design and construction of civil projects.  Coverage includes aggregates, Portland cement concrete, bituminous materials and ferrous metals.  Course consists of one hour of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Corequisite: CTC 222.   "138	CTC 250	Elementary Surveying	4	"Introductory course in surveying methods and theory.  Topics will include land surveying, construction surveying, and route surveying.  Two hours of lecture and four hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites:  CTC 162, CTC 212, CTC 213 or equivalent.  "139	CTC 255	Soils and Foundations	4	"An introduction to geotechnics and its application to problems in engineering design and construction.  Topics will include soil properties, soil testing, compaction and stabilization, stress distribution in soil, soil shear strength and lateral earth pressure.  The principles of soil mechanics will be applied to the design of foundations and retaining structures, and to the study of slope stability.  Course consists of three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: CTC 222"140	CTC 260	Hydrology	2	"Introductory course in surface water hydrology. Topics include watershed delineation, unit hydrographs, IDF curves, time of concentration and routing. The rational and TR-55 methods will be used to determine peak flows."141	CTC 261	Hydraulics	3	"Introductory course in applied hydraulics. Topics include fluid statics, buoyancy, open channel flow, conduit flow, culvert hydraulics and design, storm water systems. Course consists of two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: CTC 218."142	CTC 275	Construction Methods	4	"Provides students with an overview of the methods and materials used in the construction industry. It will look at the equipment, materials, and methods used to construct buildings and roads. The lab will focus on field trips and small building projects to give students a hands-on feel for the construction industry. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Students may not receive credit for both CTC 375 and CTC 413 or CTC 414."143	CTC 301	Professionalism in the Work Place	2	"Topics include lifelong learning; professional, ethical and social responsibilities; respect for diversity and a knowledge of contemporary professional, societal and global issues; and a commitment to quality, timeliness, and continuous improvement. Cross listed with MTC 301. "144	CTC 320	Structural Analysis	4	An investigation of the analysis of both determinate and indeterminate structures.  Emphasis is placed on application of the principles of mechanics on the analysis of structural systems.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Lab hours will be used for experiments and problem solving using computer applications.  Prerequisite: CTC 218 and CTC 222or equivalents. 145	CTC 340	Transportation Analysis	4	"Introductory course to Transportation Engineering.  Topics include highway design, traffic analysis, capacity planning, and computer modeling. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Pre/Corequisite:  MAT 121."146	CTC 415	Construction Estimating and Scheduling	4	"Teaches students the basic concepts of estimating and scheduling construction projects.  Students will learn how to estimate quantities, determine project length, and determine labor and equipment needs.  Group projects during lab times will allow students to gain practical experience.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Students may not receive credit for both CTC 370 and CTC 415.  Prerequisite:  CTC 275 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  "147	CTC 422	Design of Steel Structures	4	The design of steel structures from conceptual design through the production of contract documents. Emphasis is placed on application of the AISC Code (Allowable Stress Design) and applicable building codes to steel structures using conventional and computer-aided methods.  Course consists of three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  CTC 320.148	CTC 424	Design of Concrete Structures	4	The design of reinforced concrete structures from conceptual design through the production of contract documents.  Emphasis is placed on application of the ACI Code and applicable building codes to concrete structures using conventional and computer-aided methods.  Course consists of three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  CTC 320.149	CTC 430	Engineering Dynamics	4	"Kinematics of particles and rigid bodies.  Kinetics of particles and rigid bodies with translation, rotation and plane motion using the methods of force - mass - acceleration, work-energy, and impulse momentum.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Cross listed with MTC 430.  Prerequisite:  CTC 218 or equivalent.  Pre/Corequisite:  MAT 122 or equivalent."150	CTC 440	Highway Design	4	"Course emphasizes the highway design process using conventional and computer methods. Industry standard design handbooks and software are used to complete a highway design project involving site planning, earthwork, geometric design, pavement design, cost estimating and project management.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites:  Surveying and familiarity with CAD software."151	CTC 450	Water and Wastewater Systems	4	"Topics include water quality, water supply systems, solid waste management and pollution control. Co-requisite: CHE 110T and CHE 110L."152	CTC 465	Special Topics in Civil Technology	1 to 4	A study of a selected topic of interest to civil technologists which will enhance the student's ability to practice in his/her profession.153	CTC 470	Construction Administration	4	"Advanced course in the responsibilities and risk associated with project management within the construction industry.  Subjects addressed relate to special problems encountered in construction and the management of those problems.  Special emphasis is given to responsibilities, relationships between owners, contractors and labor, construction safety and construction contracts.  Prerequisites: CTC 275 or permission of instructor."154	CTC 475	Economic Analysis in Technology	4	"Methods for choosing between alternatives based on the time value of money.  Replacement studies, depreciation and after-tax analysis, risk, uncertainty and sensitivity analysis.  Prerequisite: MAT 121. Cross listed with MTC 475."155	CTC 476	Finite Element Applications	4	"Concepts of Finite Element Analysis and their applications.  Analysis of determinate and indeterminate structures, bar, truss, plate, and shell elements.  Condition of plane stress and plane strain.  Model generation to include fluid flow, combined elements and automatic meshing.  Extensive use of ALGOR software.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Cross listed with MTC 476.  Prerequisite: CTC 218, CTC 222, MAT 122 and a formal course in computing or permission of instructor.  "156	CTC 490	Capstone Design	3	"Provides students with the opportunity to work as part of a multi-disciplinary Civil Engineering Technology design team. The course will consist of a design project with presentations and reports. Lectures in professional practice and teaming will augment the design project. Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: Senior standing and at least 2 of the following: CTC 422, CTC 424, CTC 340, CTC 440, CTC 415, CTC 470, or permission of instructor."157	CTC 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites:  Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area. "158	CTC 492	Internship/Co-Op Assignment	2 to 4	Provides part-time supervised experience in a professional atmosphere which supplements classroom instruction.  Two written reports on the work experience and two supervisor’s evaluations required.  One site visit or conference call planned.  Required contact hours min. 150.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.  Free elective; CANNOT be counted as a technical elective.  Course is graded as satisfactory/unsatisfactory.159	Communication			160	COM 106	Introduction to Digital Media and Design	4	"Introduces students to production, design and project management environments for digital projects. Students will develop communication and design skills, with an emphasis on text-based communication and presentation of numeric data in textual and graphical modes. The class is writing-intensive. Students will be introduced to the processes of critiquing, revising and critically reflecting on their own work. "161	COM 108	Introduction to Digital Media Production	4	"Introduces foundational design theory and basic skills needed to produce digital media in a variety of formats. Projects will be completed in graphic, video and interactive modes. Students will gain hands-on experience in digital media studios and production environments. "162	COM 112	Digital Photography and Imaging	4	"Explores concepts and techniques in digital photography and imaging.  Builds and reinforces digital imaging skills including manipulation, light effects, scanning, color correction and special effects.  Combines design theory and hands-on work, introducing basic aesthetic issues in photography and image manipulation and the ethical concerns associated with the medium.  Students will generate a portfolio of images based on specific themes.  Meets the General Education Art requirement."163	COM 213	Introduction to Animation and Vector Graphics	4	"Using a mix of theoretical and practical assignments, students will develop an understanding of the conceptual issues regarding digital vector-based animation, from scripts, storyboards and production of short animation sequences.  Students are introduced to various software tools used to produce vector-based animation. Students will generate a portfolio of animations. "164	COM 216	Digital Media and Information in Society	4	"An introduction to the impact of mass and digital media on American society.  Through study of communication theory and a comparison of broadcast to digital media, and creation of original digital media projects, students will explore the relevance of the emerging information technologies within various disciplines and their own lives. Meets General Education Humanities requirement."165	COM 219	Introduction to Video Game Design and Culture	4	"Students will relate game experiences, play games and build a game relating to their interests. Different game design frameworks will be discussed, analyzed and implemented. The course will cover table top games, serious games and gamification of different fields. Students will also complete a final project in which they will create a game mod using an existing game engine. Students will keep a game journal logging their experiences playing video games. Programming experience and artistic ability are not required. "166	COM 239	Gamification Theory	4	"Introduces gamification as the use of frameworks and common design tropes from the game industry in new contexts. Focuses on theory exploring behavior and design within games and gaming, as well as game thinking in non-game contexts. Introduction to gamification theory as it applies in a variety of non-entertainment applications such as education, health, marketing and research. "167	COM 242	Introduction to Video Production	4	"Covers the fundamentals of basic video and audio production. The student develops skills necessary to serve on production crews and operate a digital video camera by producing a variety of short video projects. Also covers the fundamentals of video production with emphasis on direction, and operation of associated field and studio equipment, developing the various skills necessary to produce quality video. "168	COM 260	Introduction to Web Site Design	4	"Explores various processes associated with development of Web sites, including planning, analysis, design, implementation and promotion. Introduces students to basic Web design skills and tools in the context of design principles. "169	COM 295	Topics in Communications	1 to 4	An introductory course in selected topics in Communications not currently covered in any of the listed classes. Topics are chosen to illustrate different fields and applications which are all part of communications. 170	COM 300	Oral Communication	4	"Designed to train students' capacity for oral communication, this course emphasizes research, organization, and presentation of speeches which inform, persuade, and entertain. Delivery, style, and audience analysis will be stressed.  Small group discussions will aid the students to interact with others, and to apply the theories and techniques of debating. Extemporaneous speeches are also required and evaluated by the group."171	COM 302	Presentational Speaking	4	"Students will submit a proposal and present a paper just as they would at a professional technical communication conference.  Public speaking skills will be augmented with the latest graphic presentation skills and software.  Students will research, write, and organize a talk to either persuade or inform an audience of technical communication professionals.  This course is designated for technical communication majors; others on a space available basis.  Students may not receive credit for both COM 302 and COM 300."172	COM 306	Report Writing and Technical Communication	4	"Students will learn to communicate more effectively in a professional environment through ample practice with individual as well as group composed documents (i.e. memos, letters, instructions, proposals, and analytical reports) and the oral presentation of a formal report.  Since the course is usually taught in a computer lab, word processing and computer graphics are used to enhance the reports. Meets Upper Division Writing.  "173	COM 307	Business Communications	4	"Business communication will give students preparation for effective writing in business and related fields.  Because an understanding of persuasion is key to effective business communication, students will practice and master both audience and rhetorical analysis for all formal assignments, and the standards of formatting for various business documents.  Specifically, students will write single and multiple audience routine and specialized correspondences using direct and indirect organization patterns, resumes and job letters, proposals, annotated bibliographies and multi-part research papers.  Students will write graded and ungraded work individually and in teams, and part of the course will be devoted to self and team evaluation.  A graded oral presentation will also be part of the class.  Meets Upper Division Writing requirement."174	COM 308	Analytical & Research Writing	4	"Students pursue a research project of their own design, using primary and secondary sources.  Scholarly and theoretical sources are analyzed in class and used in the research essay.  Students keep a research log and practice a variety of research methods.  Meets Upper Division Writing.  "175	COM 309 	Machinima and 3D Animation	4	"Machinima combines “machine” and “cinema” to form an emerging mode of digital media production. This studio course focuses on creating digital productions integrating source material from film and games utilizing computer graphics engines. Students will review and critique work created by early machinima artists, comparing machinima to traditional film techniques, and exploring opportunities emerging game and film production strategies offer to machinima artists. Legal and ethical issues associated with intellectual property will be examined. Students will be expected to produce their own independent work within this genre utilizing advanced computer graphics engines. Prerequisites: COM 219 and COM 239 or permission of instructor (concurrent). "176	COM 310	Technical Editing	4	"A study of the principles of editing and their application to a wide variety of documents.  Students will complete two major projects, one in copyediting and one in comprehensive editing.  For both projects, students work with documents and clients from off campus.  Students edit many sample documents and review each other’s work in class.  Prerequisite:  COM 306 or equivalent.  Cross listed with IDT 531."177	COM 311	Public Relations Writing	4	"Designed to teach students the basic concepts of effective public relations writing and to give them a solid foundation in the use of multiple communication tools that are used in the public relations industry.  The emphasis is on media techniques, preparation of materials, and the dissemination of them through appropriate channels.  Meets Upper Division writing requirement."178	COM 316	Media and Communication	4	"The impact of the mass media (television, radio, journalism, film) upon American society is welldocumented.  Emerging technologies (computer-mediated communication, cable video, satellite communications) will further change the ways in which we communicate.  Through study of communication theory, survey of traditional and new media, and creation of original media projects, students will explore the relevance of the new technologies to their own disciplines. Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."179	COM 319	Asset Production	4	"Asset Production for Video Games is a course that will instruct students how to create assets for use in real-time game engines.  Students will learn and demonstrate the process of model and texture creation that is utilized in the current world of professional video game production.  By the end of the semester, students will have created props, vehicles, and environments that can be viewed and interacted with through real-time game levels.  The course will be broken down into lectures and labs where students will learn and practice a new aspect of asset production each week through the use of various industry standard content creation tools.  The course will cover 3D modeling, UV unwrapping, texturing, sound integration, and the building of custom game levels.  Programming experience and artistic ability is not a prerequisite to the course. Prerequisites: COM 219, COM 239, or permission of instructor. "180	COM 320	Information Design	4	"Students will be exposed to the nature of visual language and how designers use and readers process such information.  Theories and research that relate to visual communication will be covered. Students will analyze and evaluate selected readings and examples; and students will use modern desktop publishing techniques to design and produce printed material.  Additionally, the theory of design of online material will be discussed with particular emphasis on publication of World Wide Web home pages.  Projects will include home page design and publication.  Concepts covered earlier in the course will be applied to computer screen design.  Prerequisite: Knowledge of basic computer skills."181	COM 340	Writing and Production in Digital Media	4	"Develops skills in writing, editing and producing digital media, including commercial Web, blogging and micro-blogging, video and audio scripting and non-linear texts. Emphasis on peer review, editing and revision. Exploration of current tools and techniques used for the production and distribution of digital media, including social networks, collaborative systems, and interactive platforms. Meets Upper Division Writing requirement."182	COM 342	Field and Studio Video Production	4	"Covers the fundamentals of basic video and audio production.  The student develops skills necessary to serve on production crews and operate a digital video camera.  Also covers the fundamentals of video production with emphasis on direction, and operation of associated field equipment, developing the various skills necessary to produce quality video."183	COM 350	Visual Thinking and Writing	4	Teaches students to think visually and convert complex concepts and processes into visual designs and models. Students work in stages beginning with writing assignments and make revisions leading to visualizations. Meets Upper Division Writing requirement.184	COM 375	Designing and Writing Interactive Texts	4	"Examines and applies techniques associated with designing and writing interactive texts, ranging from traditional web pages to wikis, social networking platforms and stand-alone works of fiction and non-fiction.  Analysis of contemporary applications of interactive text in digital culture and professional environments.  Emphasis on creating original works as well as reengineering existing linear texts in interactive platforms."185	COM 380	Critical Perspectives on Digital Society	4	"Exposes students to a range of critical/cultural theories and approaches to the study of new media, including those allied to medium theory, cultural studies, political economy of communication, ideological inquiry, globalization, and commercialism. Students will explore multiple theorists/theoretical positions in depth. Cross-listed with IDS 380"186	COM 400	Computer Software Documentation	4	"Explains how to write professional computer documentation, from writing a proposal, to gathering data, to designing a document and related visuals, to running a usability test on the material, to revising style and polishing the final reference.  Discusses the nature of visual language and considers the utilization of modern desktop publishing techniques to develop communication ideas and transfer them onto the printed page. Student teams develop a software documentation package using the school's desktop publishing hardware and software.  Meets Upper Division Writing requirement."187	COM 411	Digital Network Communications: Issues and Implications	4	"Examines the various facets of networked communication, including a survey of its history and emergence. An exploration of the social and collaborative nature of networked communication and key issues including copyright, and intellectual property.   Emphasis is placed on the nature of networks, and on critical examination of the social, political, legal and educational aspects of networked communication.  "188	COM 414	Advanced Digital Graphic Design	4	"Designed to increase the student’s ability to creatively design within the digital domain.  Major topics include:  essentials for successful digital design, color and color accuracy in the digital world, symmetric and asymmetric layout techniques, creative use of shapes and space, large file management techniques, theoretical and applied typography, professional production methods to increase workflow, and stereographic imagery.  Prerequisite:  Basic Photoshop knowledge."189	COM 416 	Advanced Digital Animation	4	"This course builds on the design, layout, and basic animation features learned in previous courses by adding more advanced interactivity and user input as well as development of more complex 3D-like imagery and storyline techniques. Where the previous course focuses on object-oriented directed imagery and sound, this course involves more advanced scripting techniques to develop a vocabulary of concepts, skills, and aesthetic practices for producing more meaningful animation. The course blends direct technical instruction — including programming in ActionScript and server-side file and scripting access — with narrative and aesthetic development and discussion with the goal of moving past linear animation to more evolving and interactive animation practices.  "190	COM 417	Visual Identity and Branding	4	"A studio course in visual communication. Brand identity is the use of design to project a memorable graphic image of brands, services, corporations, institutions, organizations or other groups. Branding experiences include brand identity, promotion and advertising. The course will include logos, multiple design, and advertising applications with coordinated visual elements. Prerequisite: COM 320"191	COM 419	 Video Game Design Studio	4	"Students will apply video game industry frameworks to build and “gamify” information products in areas such as health care, network security and journalism. Students will learn skills related to game creation that can be used in real world settings to design and market a full-featured product. Programming and design skills common to the video game industry will be covered. The students will be expected to engage in teamwork, promotion of their game, creation of their game’s assets and engagement into the video game industry. "192	COM 422	Advanced Photography	4	"This class will go beyond the basic principles of digital photography and into a more in depth study of photographic principles, techniques, and contemporary criticism. Specifically, the class will cover photographic fundamentals such as camera types, exposure, shutter speed, f/stop, depth of field, lens types and uses, flash and off-camera flash, studio lighting and printing. Students will become adept with advanced digital manipulation techniques in Adobe Photoshop. At the end of the course, the student will have produced a portfolio of images demonstrating proficiency in the aesthetics of the photographic medium, as well as essays covering the history and criticism of photographic arts and artists. Prerequisite: COM 112 or equivalent or permission of instructor (concurrent)."193	COM 429	Professional Game Production	4	"Focuses on the business of video games, market models, and promotion in a global electronic marketplace.  Examines a full spectrum of game experiences and deconstructs their systems, in the context of the global game industry.  Analyzes the many facets of creating a player-centric game experience from the cultural significance of games and play to conceptualizing and proving concepts for a broad range of game media target markets and purposes.  Prerequisites: COM 219 and COM 419 or permission of the instructor (with concurrency). "194	COM 460	Advanced Web Site Design	4	"This course builds on the design, layout, and development principles learned in previous courses by teaching students to approach web site design and structure in a new way.  Where previous courses focus on designing the front end of a static web site, COM 460 focuses on developing the back end of a dynamic web site.  Students will produce an interactive commercial web site, incorporating specific data structures, web elements, and web technologies, while employing the design principles learned in previous courses.  Prerequisite:  COM 420."195	COM 490	Special Topics in Communications	1 to 4	An indepth treatment of a selected topic not normally treated extensively in other communication courses.  The subject matter will be related to current trends in communication.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.196	COM 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites:  Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area.  Standard grading or S/U option at discretion of faculty supervisor.  Options must be chosen no later than last day to add/drop."197	COM 492	Digital Media Internship	2 to 8	A professional experience designed to provide exposure to the field of digital media design and communication. Students either work on or off campus under the direction of a qualified digital media professional. Permission of program faculty and internship sponsor required. 198	COM 495	Senior Practicum in Communication	4	"Integrates academic and practical experience by placing students in an industrial, corporate or professional writing setting.  Students will choose clients in various businesses and industries, and they will work either on or off site in completing their major projects.  As students work through the documentation process, they will be given detailed classroom instruction about writing and editing in the corporate culture.  This course is designed as a one semester practicum where students will meet with the instructor in the classroom and with their clients on a weekly basis. Prerequisites:  COM 306 and COM 320, and permission of instructor."199	COM 499	Portfolio Review and Professional Development	4	"Gives Communication and Information Design majors a first-hand look at the job search process (professional development) and portfolio development. Students will be expected to research some aspect of the field, complete and write up an informational interview, submit a portfolio for review, and go on an actual interview. Prerequisite: COM 302, COM 306, COM 320, COM 380. Corequisite: COM 495.  Student must be in his/her last or next to last semester in the program."200	Community and Behavioral Health			201	CBH 290	Special Topics in Health and Well-Being	4	Investigates a topic in health and well-being. Students may receive credit in future semesters for a different topic. Prerequisites: SOC 100 or SOC 110 and PSY 100.202	CBH 375	Psychosocial Context of Health and Wellbeing	4	"Integrates psychological and sociological perspectives in understanding health and well-being.  Examines topics such as health models, mind-body connections, stress/illness connection, stigma, environmental links to health, health policy, and social disparities/inequalities in health and well being.  Prerequisites: STA 100 and CBH 475"203	CBH 440	Fundamentals of Grant Writing	4	"Provides an overview of the fundamentals of grant writing, including locating funding sources, program design and program evaluation. Prerequisites: SOC 100, SOC 110 or Introductory SOC or ANT course."204	CBH 490	Selected Topics in Health and Well-Being	4	In-depth treatment of a topic in health and well-being. Student may receive credit in future semester for a different topic. Prerequisites: SOC 100 or SOC110 and PSY 100.205	CBH 491	Independent Study in Health and Wellbeing	1 to 4	"Provides a structure for extensive study and/or directed research (under faculty supervision) on a topic.  Application form must include a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method for evaluation, and a suggested number of credits.  Prerequisite: matriculated students only; permission of the Instructor.  "206	CBH 492	Methods of Inquiry in Health and Well-Being	4	"First of a two-semester methods/capstone sequence, students will receive training in both qualitative and quantitative methods, as well as participate in a practicum experience related to health and well-being. Students will draft an individual research proposal to be implemented in the second semester of the sequence (CBH 493). Prerequisites: SOC 100, PSY 100; Co-requisites: SOC 370, PSY 377."207	CBH 493	Project Seminar in Health and Well-Being	4	"Second of a two-semester methods/capstone sequence in Community and Behavioral Health, students will continue with the practicum placement from CBH 492 and will carry out an individual research project in the area of health and well-being. Prerequisite: CBH 492."208	CBH 495	Practicum in Health and Wellbeing	4	"Integrates academic and practical experience during a semester-long placement in a health/wellness setting.  Emphasis on developing knowledge, skills, and competence as a professional.  Project requirements will vary, based on the setting.  Prerequisite: minimum of 3.0 GPA and permission of the Instructor.  "209	Computer Engineering Technology			210	CET 101	Fundamentals of Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology	4	"Introduction to basic circuit laws and analysis, transient circuits and first order circuits. Introduction to electronic devices and linear electronics. Examine the concepts of power systems, programmable logic controllers, and transistor switches. May not be taken for credit by graduates of associate degree programs in electrical/electronic or computer engineering technology. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Corequisite: MAT 120 or equivalent or permission of instructor. Cross-listed with ETC 101."211	CET 102	Electric Circuits	4	"Units and definitions. Ohm’s Law and Kirchhoff’s Laws. Analysis of resistive circuits. Circuit analysis using superposition, nodal and mesh methods, Norton Thevenin theorems, and current and voltage divider rules. Transient and sinusoidal steady state response of circuits containing resistors, capacitors, and incutors.   Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Cross listed with ETC 102"212	CET 103	Electronics I	4	"Introduction to semiconductors, conductors, and insulators. Analysis of transistors, diodes, and their related application in rectifier and amplifier circuits. Waveform interpretation, ACDC load lines, biasing techniques, small signal amplifiers, and h parameters. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: ETC 102 or permission of instructor.  All students who have an EET associate degree may not enroll in this course for credit. Cross listed with ETC 103."213	CET 203	Electronics II	4	"Introduction to operational amplifier circuits incorporating feedback.  Amplifier configurations, feedback amplifiers, applications of OpAmps in analog computers, and active filters. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: ETC 103 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  All students who have an EET associate degree may not enroll for this course for credit. Cross listed with ETC 203"214	CET 210	Digital Systems I	4	"Fundamentals and advanced concepts of digital logic. Boolean algebra and functions. Design and implementation of combinatorial and sequential logic, minimization techniques, number representation, basic binary arithmetic and finite state machines. Logic families and digital integrated circuits and use of CAD tools for logic design. Prerequisite: ETC 102 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  All students who have an EET associate degree may not enroll in this course for credit.  Cross listed with ETC 210."215	CET 265	Digital Systems II	4	Study of Digital Systems Design using the Intel family of microprocessors and their peripheral support integrated circuits. Incorporate Intel assembly language to develop programs to run the Intel hardware. Devices studied include the 8255A PPI and 8251 PCI. Design and implementation of Intel hardware and software will be emphasized. Interfacing and testing of the computer’s internal buses using logic analyzers and other test equipment will also be included.   Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory.  Prerequisite:  ETC 210 or equivalent.  Cross listed with ETC 265.216	CET 299	Quality Control and Workplace Issues	2	"To provide a broad educational understanding of the impact of engineering solutions in a global and societal context along with a knowledge of contemporary issues and career opportunities.  Also, focus will be placed on the process controls necessary for the practice of electrical and computer engineering.  Cross listed with ETC 299."217	CET 342	Microprocessor and Embedded Systems Programming and Design	4	Programming the microprocessor for embedded systems application.  Includes an introduction to interfacing components and hardware of the microprocessor.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: ETC 110 or permission of instructor.  No prior microprocessor background needed.  Cross listed with ETC 342.218	CET 345	Sequential Logic Design	4	"Introduces advanced sequential logic design through the use of hardware description languages. Students will obtain hands-on experience about digital systems in Hardware languages such as Verilog and VHDL. FPGA will be extensively used in the lab. The functionality, limitations, and usage of standard sequential components and PLDs will be discussed. Various CAD tools will be used for modeling, synthesizing and implementing several digital systems. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: CET 210 or equivalent. Cross listed with ETC 345."219	CET 355	Introduction to Nanosystems VLSI	4	"Introduces CMOS devices and manufacturing technology. CMOS logic gates and their layout will be introduced. Propagation delay, noise margins, and power dissipation will be studied. Students will gain knowledge on memory design. Various CAD tools will be used. Four hours of lecture per week. Prerequisite: CET 210 or equivalent. Cross listed with ETC 355."220	CET 416	Data Communication & Computer Network Technology	4	"The principles and techniques of data and computer communications are covered in detail in this course.  Topics include principles of data transmissions, data encoding, digital communication techniques, transmission codes, error detection and correction, protocols, communication networks, interfacing and architecture.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Cross listed with ETC 416."221	CET 423	Microprocessor Interfacing	4	Analysis of microprocessor interfacing with operational hardware.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites: ETC 110 or equivalent and ETC 342 or permission of instructor.  Cross listed with ETC 423.222	CET 429	"Microprocessors, Microprogramming and Computer Architecture"	4	Design of microprocessor and computer central processing units.  Stresses the architecture and microprogramming of the processor.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: ETC 110 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  Cross listed with ETC 429. 223	CET 431	PC Integration and Maintenance	4	This course stresses the architecture and design of personal computers and emphasizes the use of diagnostic hardware and software to evaluate PC systems in actual lab situations.  Two hours of lecture and four hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: ETC 311 or ETC 342 or CS 220.  Cross listed with ETC 431.224	CET 444	Special Topics in Microprocessors/Digital	4	Seminar on the state-of-the-art in microprocessor and digital techniques.  Topics will vary as technology changes.  May be taken more than once for credit provided topics are different.  Prerequisite:  ETC 110 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  Cross listed with ETC 444.225	CET 445	System-on-Chip Embedded Systems I	4	"Introduces advanced digital design through the use of hardware description languages for the specification, simulation and synthesis of complex digital systems. Students will obtain hands-on experience about System-on-Chip embedded systems. FPGA will be extensively used in the lab. Either Verilog or VHDL, the two most widely used digital modeling languages for the description of digital systems at the board and component level will be studied. Structural (device interconnection), dataflow (register transfer level), and behavioral (algorithmic) models will be utilized. Various CAD tools will be used for modeling, synthesizing, and implementing several digital systems. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  CET 342 or CET 265 or equivalent. Cross listed with ETC 445. "226	 CET 466	System-on-Chip Embedded Systems II	4	"Hardware and software concepts in the design and analysis of embedded systems will be covered. Memory types and peripheral interfaces used in embedded systems will be considered. Performance analysis of embedded systems design will be studied. Design tradeoffs made by different models of embedded systems will be identified. Students will obtain hands-on experience about System-on-Chip embedded systems. FPGA will be extensively used in the lab. Either Verilog or VHDL, the two most widely used digital modeling languages for the description of digital systems at the board and component level will be studied as well as C programming language. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: CET 445 or equivalent. Cross listed with ETC 466."227	Computer Science			228	CS 100	Introduction to Computing Seminar	4	An introduction to programming and problem solving using a high level programming language such as Python. Designed for students who may want/need some preparation for CS 108.229	CS 108	Computing Fundamentals	4	"Fundamental concepts of computing and programming.  Topics include data types, control structures, functions, arrays, files, and the mechanics of running, testing, and debugging.  The course also offers an introduction to the historical and social context of computing and an overview of computer science as a discipline.  Course taught using the C programming language.  "230	CS 220	Computer Organization	4	"Introduces students to the organization and architecture of computer systems as a hierarchy of levels, beginning with the standard von Neumann model and then moving forward to more recent architectural concepts.  Topics include digital logic, microprogramming, conventional machine and assembly language levels.  Emphasis is given to those aspects of computer hardware that effect programming.  Prerequisites:  CS 108 and MAT 115."231	CS 240	Data Structures and Algorithms	4	"Fundamental concepts of data structures and the algorithms that proceed from them.  Topics include recursion, the underlying philosophy of object-oriented programming, fundamental data structures including stacks, queues, linked lists, hash tables, trees, and graphs.  The basics of algorithmic analysis, and an introduction to the principles of language translation.  Prerequisites:  CS 108 and MAT 115."232	CS 249	Object-Oriented Programming	4	"Problem-solving and program design using an object-oriented approach.  Starts with a review of control structures and data types with emphasis on structured data types and array processing.  It then moves on to introduce the object-oriented programming paradigm, focusing on the definition and use of classes along with the fundamentals of object-oriented design.  Other topics include an overview of programming language principles, simple analysis of algorithms, basic searching and sorting techniques, and an introduction to software engineering issues.  Prerequisite:  CS 240."233	CS 307	UNIX Programming Environment	4	"Promotes effective use of the UNIX programming environment. Topics include: text editor, file system, utility programs, pipe and filter paradigm, construction and use of regular expressions, shell language programming, internet, and interprocess communication. Prerequisite: CS 108 or 317"234	CS 311	Data Analysis	2	"A hands-on introduction to data analysis using a microcomputer-based statistical package such as SPSS PC+.   Topics include descriptive statistics, measures of association, and hypothesis testing.  Emphasis is placed upon data collection, data organization and report generation. Prior coursework in statistics is helpful, but not required.  May not be taken by students who have received credit for CSC 323."235	CS 321	Introduction to Web Programming	4	"Hands-on introduction to Web programming. Students learn how to create Web pages, write programs to create dynamic Web applications, and understand basic Web development concepts, processes, and best practices. Students who take CS 321 may not take CS 351 for credit. Prerequisite(s): CS 108 and CS 307."236	CS 324	Introduction to Internet Tools in Windows	2	"A hands-on introduction to the use of software Internet tools in Windows environments and the concepts and perspective in computing and communications essential to using them effectively.  Topics include the Windows interface and environment, and tools for browsing, editing and Web site creation and maintenance available in the Windows environment.  At the conclusion of the course, the student will have an understanding of computing communication environments and the ability to use Web software tools to construct, configure, and maintain a Web site. "237	CS 330	Operating Systems and Networking	4	"Integrates the fundamental concepts of operating systems and networking with the purpose of realizing workable models of modules and constructs.  Topics include concurrency, synchronization, processes, threads, long and short term scheduling, memory management, I/O, file systems, device management and multimedia systems.  Networking topics include basic network models, layered architectures, network hardware and standard protocols.  Within this framework, client-server microkernel design is also presented.  Prerequisites:  CS 220 and CS 240."238	CS 345	Logic Design	4	"A concentration on the digital logic level of computer organization.  The theoretical and practical concepts covered include: Boolean algebra, simplification of Boolean functions, and analysis and synthesis of digital circuits with emphasis on mixed logic.  The most common combinatorial and sequential integrated circuits, and algorithmic state machines are highlighted. Prerequisites: CS 220 and MAT 115."239	CS 348	LISP Programming	2	"An intensive survey of the LISP programming language. Topics include: expressions, data types and representations, control structures, and input/output functions.  Prerequisite: CS 240."240	CS 350	Information and Knowledge Management	4	"The concept of information as a unifying theme.  Investigates a range of issues in computer science, including database systems, artificial intelligence, human-computer interaction, multimedia systems, and data communication.  Prerequisites:  CS 240 and MAT 115."241	CS 351	Web Development and Internet	4	"This course teaches students to install, configure and maintain an Internet/Intranet Web Server.  Topics include: developing Web pages, Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), Common Gateway Interface (CGI) scripting, and displaying information on the Web via a Database Management System (DBMS). Students who take CS 351 may not take CS 321 for credit.  Prerequisites: CS 108 and CS 307."242	CS 370	Software Engineering	4	"Combines a range of topics integral to the design, implementation, and testing of a medium-scale software system with the practical experience of implementing such a project as a member of a programmer team.  In addition, this course includes discussions on professionalism and ethical responsibilities in software development and human-computer interaction.  Prerequisites:  CS 220 and CS 249."243	CS 371	Software Engineering Projects	4	"This course offers the student an opportunity to participate in a nontrivial software engineering team project and to apply the concepts studied in CS 370.  The following will be emphasized throughout the project: documentation of projects; different roles in a project; corporate, academic and military software development standards; specification and requirements documents; configuration, quality assurance, test, verification, integration plans; postdevelopment software support.  Prerequisite:  CS 370."244	CS 377	Introduction to the Theory of Computing	4	"Introduction to theoretical computer science.  Topics include: automata, formal languages, Turing machines, recursive function theory, computational complexity, and program correctness. Prerequisites: CS 240 and MAT 115."245	CS 381	Principles of Computer Security and Cryptography	4	"Focuses on general principles of computer security and cryptography. Topics covered include threat trees, threat taxonomies, malware, common attacks, cryptographic principles, block ciphers, hash functions and public-key cryptography. Prerequisites: MAT 115 or MAT 413, CS 249 and CS 330.  "246	CS 407	UNIX System Administration	4	Topics will include: concepts involving system administration and maintenance procedures to facilitate normal system operation; technical details regarding problems that could result from operating system malfunction as well as threats to system security that are inherent in a multiprogramming environment; techniques and tools for hardware and software configuration management.  Prerequisite: CS 307; Corequisite: CS 330.247	CS 409	Software Project Management	4	This course presents different techniques for managing software projects and technical staff and familiarizes the student with artifacts of project management.  The topics to be covered include:  user specification; project proposal; contracts; software cost models and estimation techniques; project planning; implementation management; project delivery.  Prerequisite: CS 370.248	CS 420	Numerical Computing	4	"Basic techniques of numerical computation.  Topics include: computer arithmetic and error control, solution of nonlinear algebraic equations including some nonlinear optimization, polynomial interpolations including splines, curve fitting, integration, and an introduction to differential equations.  Emphasis will be on nonformal settings with a view toward applications.  Prerequisites:  Calculus and proficiency in a high-level programming language."249	CS 421	Computational Linear Algebra	4	"Computational aspects of linear algebra, including linear optimization models, are explored.  Topics include: different algorithms for solution of sets of linear algebraic equations, eigenvalue problems, linear programming, clustering techniques, and software requirements.  Prerequisites:  CS 240 and MAT 340 or equivalent."250	CS 431	Principles of Programming Languages	4	"This course fosters a disciplined approach to the design of programs.  Through carefully chosen assignments, the need for certain data structures and programming language features is made apparent. Several different programming languages are used.  Topics include: structured programming, functional programming, recursion, and string processing.  Prerequisite: CS 240."251	CS 441	Computer Systems Architecture	4	"Core principle underlying past, current, future and theoretical machines are discussed in quantitative terms and illustrated with multiple architectures. The tradeoff between cost and efficiency of technologies is a primary focus. Instruction set architectures, instruction level parallelism, N address architectures, RISC/CISC/VLIW philosophies, memory hierarchies, introductory branch prediction, scheduling, data and instruction caching, and processor interfacing are reviewed. The role of simulation and modeling in architecture studies is also discussed.  Prerequisite: CS 220."252	CS 445	UNIX Network Programming	4	The course explores computer networks from the implementation and programming point of view.  The network architecture and communication protocols studied by the class allow connection of heterogeneous systems in an environment that may be geographically distributed.  Prerequisites:  CS 240 and knowledge of UNIX and C.253	CS 446	Local Area Network Architecture	4	"An intensive study of LAN architecture models for Computer Science students.  Topics include:  contentionfree and contention-based models, hybrid nets, HSLANs, integrated voice/video/data models.  Prerequisites:  CS 220 and CS 330."254	CS 450	Computer Graphics	4	"A conceptual and programmatic introduction to raster and vector graphics.  Topics include object-oriented graphics application programming interfaces, hierarchical modeling, concepts of scene graphs, geometric transformations and transform groups, behaviors for animation and interaction, interactive tools for geometries and behaviors, classical application programming interfaces, web-related graphics technologies, and graphics file formats.  Prerequisites:  CS 240 and MAT 115. "255	CS 451	Distributed Systems	4	A study of distributed protocol and software frameworks. Synchronous and asynchronous networks will be covered. Protocols for leader election and distributed consensus will be presented synchronous networks. Fault-tolerant protocols will be discussed for synchronous systems as well as their adaptability in asynchronous models. The use of shared memory and message passing as well as Byzantine failures will be discussed.  Prerequisites:  CS 240 and CS 330.256	CS 454	System Simulation	4	"An introduction to the basic techniques of systems modeling and analysis through system simulation. Discrete and continuous system simulation models, use of various simulation packages and analysis of simulation output are included for consideration.  Prerequisites:  C, C++, or JAVA and senior status or permission of instructor."257	CS 477	Algorithms	4	"How good is it?  Is there a better algorithm to solve it?  This course aims at developing a toolbox of algorithms for solving real problems that arise frequently in computer applications and the principles and techniques for determining their time and space requirements and efficiency.  In addition, the general complexity spectrum is discussed to give students a grounding in intractability and unsolvability.  Prerequisites:  MAT 115 and CS 240."258	CS 480	Compiler Design	4	Basic concepts of formal languages and automata theory and their applications in compiler writing.  Several practical parsing methods are discussed.  Prerequisite: CS 240.259	CS 489	Cooperative WorkStudy in Computer Science	1 to 4	Student will be employed by a cooperating firm or agency. Periodic progress reports will be required. Students should be paid by the employer. Prerequisites: Limited to Computer Science majors who have completed core courses and secured departmental approval. Additional restrictions are on file with the department. Only S/U grades are awarded for this course.260	CS 490	Selected Topics in Computer Science	1 to 4	"Coverage of a specialized computer science topic, of current interest but not adequately treated in regular course offerings.  The topic may, for example, be the theoretical and programmatic study of a methodology for a class of computational problems, an introduction to a research area of computing, or an in-depth examination of the usage and internals of a software artifact or framework.  The same topic will not be repeated for at least two years.  Prerequisites:  CS 240 and MAT 115."261	CS 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."262	CS 495	Artificial Intelligence	4	"An introduction to fundamental knowledge representation schemes and intelligent problem-solving techniques, and corresponding implementation software artifacts.  Both symbol system and biology/society-based approaches are covered.  Topics include state space heuristic search, constraint satisfaction, classical logic, fuzzy logic, Bayesian techniques, connectionism, genetic algorithms, swarm and multi-agent intelligence, and planning.  Prerequisites:  CS 240 and MAT 115."263	CS 498	Capstone Project	2	"Offers students the opportunity to integrate their knowledge of computer science by completing a significant project.  Periodic written and oral presentations are required.  Most students will complete, report on, and present a project started while taking CS 370.  Prerequisites:  CS 330, CS 350, and CS 370."264	CSC 301J	Introduction to Computing and JAVA Programming 	4	"Basic concepts of computing and computer programming are covered.  An introduction to computing environments, the internet and applications programming using JAVA.  No prior knowledge of computers or computing is expected.  Course is for non-majors.  Computer Information Science/Systems majors will not receive Computer Science credit for this course."265	CSC 301V	Introduction to Computing and Visual Basic Programming	4	Basic concepts of computing and programming with object orientation using Visual Basic.  Course is intended for beginners.  266	CSC 310	Computers and Society	2	"A halfsemester course examining the impact of computers in contemporary society.  Topics include: components of a computer system, uses of computers in various disciplines and professions, and problems of data security and privacy."267	CSC 311B	Word Processing (Windows)	1	"A handson introduction to word processing using Word for Windows or a similar Windows package.  Topics include text entry, formatting, spell checking, search and replace, use of a thesaurus and grammar checker, printing, and merge printing.  At the conclusion of this course, the student will have the skills necessary for the production of a term paper, resume, or similar prose document, and the ability to produce a customized form letter. Students who have received credit for CSC 311 or CSC 311A may not take this course.  Only S/U grades are awarded for this course."268	CSC 311C	Spreadsheets I	1	"A handson introduction to spreadsheets. Topics include building, saving and printing a worksheet, simple formatting, functions, and sorting.  At the conclusion of the course, the student should be able to design a spreadsheet for statistical or financial applications, and to answer whatif questions. Students who have received credit for CSC 311 may not take this course.  Only S/U grades are awarded for this course."269	CSC 311E	Microcomputer Database	1	"A handson introduction to the use of a microcomputer database using Microsoft Access or a similar product.  Topics include database creation, data entry, sorting and report preparation, modification of the database structure, adding/deleting records, form and report generation.  Only S/U grades are awarded for this course. "270	CSC 311F	Presentation Graphics	1	"A handson introduction to presentation graphics using PowerPoint or a similar package.  Topics include text charts, bar/line charts, pie charts, slide shows and transition effects, and output to disk, monochrome and color hard copy, overhead transparencies, 35mm film recorder and videotape.  At the conclusion of the course, the student will have the skills necessary to use a presentation graphics package to communicate effectively employing a variety of media. Students who have received credit for CSC 312 may not take this course.  Only S/U grades are awarded for this course."271	CSC 311G	Introduction to Desktop Publishing	1	"A handson introduction to the use of a desktop publishing package for the creation of fliers, posters, newsletters, and similar short publications.  Topics include page layout, style sheets, text formatting, and image handling.  Output to monochrome and color printers is covered.  At the conclusion of this course, the student will be able to design and create a short publication.  Prerequisite:  Ability to use a word processing program, or CSC 311A, CSC 311B, or its equivalent.  This course may not be taken by students who have received credit for CSC 312.  Only S/U grades are awarded for this course."272	CSC 311K	Spreadsheets II	1	"Builds upon CSC 311C.  Topics include lookup and reference functions, formula auditing, data validation, advanced charting, trend lines, data linking, data consolidation, and PivotTable construction/operation/reports.  Only S/U grades are awarded for this course.  Prerequisite: CSC 311C or permission of the instructor.  "273	CSC 317	Computer Systems and C/C++ Programming	4	The basic concepts of computer science and computer programming are covered.  Computer hardware and applications programming using C are also introduced.  No prior knowledge of computers or computing is required.  This course is intended for nonmajors.  Computer Science or Computer Systems majors will not receive Computer Science credit for this course.274	Computer Systems			275	IS 305	Application Programming with COBOL	4	"Problem solving, algorithm development, and application development using the COBOL programming language.  Emphasizes user interface, calculations, data sorting, report writing, data manipulation, data validation, string operations, intrinsic functions, and file handling based on the structured/procedural paradigm.  Programming tools that leverage the power of the COBOL programmer are included.  Prerequisite:  CS 240."276	IS 310	Hardware and Network Infrastructure	4	"Conceptual and practical study of the computer hardware, connectivity devices, and other supporting artifacts that comprise enterprise internal information systems and external systems like the public Internet.  Topics include:  fundamental digital logic; common integrated chips and boards for computer organization; execution of processor instructions; device interfacing; peripheral devices; common abstractions for enabling software development; major functions of an operating system; common connectivity devices and their operation.  Prerequisite:  CS 108."277	IS 320	Systems Analysis and Design	4	"Examines the process of logically developing information systems.  Focuses on the analysis, planning, and logical design phases of the systems development life cycle that culminate in the specification of functional system requirements.  Concentrates on methods, techniques, and tools used to determine information requirements and the documentation of these requirements in a thorough and unambiguous form.  Topics include:  data collection; risk and feasibility analysis; requirements analysis; process modeling; data modeling; prototyping; joint application development; rapid application development; structured walkthroughs; project management; presentations; report writing.  Prerequisite:  CS 240. "278	IS 324	SQL Programming	2	"Designed to develop SQL programming proficiency.  Emphasis is placed on the Data Definition Language (DDL) and Data Manipulation Language (DML) of SQL.  Upon completion, students should be able to write SQL statements which create, update, and maintain database tables as well as write SQL queries to manipulate data in database tables.  Prerequisite:  CS 108 or equivalent knowledge.  Students may not receive degree credit for both IS 324 and IS 325."279	IS 325	Database Management Systems	4	"Introduction to fundamentals of database management systems, techniques for database design, and principles of database administration.  Emphasizes data modeling, database design, database application development, and database management.  Topics include conceptual models; logical models; normalization; query languages; architectures such as centralized, distributed and client/server; database integrity; database security; error recovery; and concurrency control.  Prerequisite:  CS 240. "280	IS 330	Decision Support and Intelligent Systems	4	"An introduction to the fundamentals of Decision Support Systems (DSS).  Focuses on the logical aspects of data processing and analysis.  Topics to be discussed include historical review of computerized decision support, DSS architecture.  Data Warehouses, Online Analytical Processing (OLAP), and Data Mining.  The student is introduced to the principles of Intelligent Systems with an emphasis on Expert Systems (ES) and Artificial Neural Networks (ANN).  The organizational and business implications of decision support systems are reviewed.  Prerequisite:  CS 240."281	IS 340	E-Commerce	4	"An introduction to the fundamentals of e-business and e-commerce.  Topics to be discussed include e-business models, principles of electronic business transactions, Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), electronic checks, and digital cash.  The student is introduced to the protocols of secure e-commerce including the basics of cryptography, digital signatures.  Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), Secure Electronic Transaction Protocol (SET).  The languages and e-commerce technologies to be discussed include Java, JavaScript, XML, intelligent agents, and networking protocols.  Prerequisite: CS 240."282	IS 341	    Geographic Information Systems	4	Students will learn the concepts and components of a geographic information system (GIS) as well as the essential skills of operating a functional GIS through the use of a GIS software package.  283	IS 469	Information Technology Project Management	4	"Enables students in the information technology area to understand project management principles for IT programs and be able to apply these principles to successfully manage IT projects.  Covers the essentials of IT project management which include attributes of projects, project integration management, project scope, time, and cost management, project quality and risk management, human resources and communications management, and procuring IT projects and services from outside agencies.  Includes individual and group assignments and activities, including a group case study, where students can apply what they have learned to real-life situations.  Prerequisite:  IS 320."284	IS 470	Database Programming	4	"Provides rigorous coverage of database programming using the Structured Query Language (SQL) and SQL coupled with other programming languages.  Topics include:  database management systems (DBMS); data definition; data manipulation; data control; database administration; report generation; DBMS built-in and programmer-created procedures, functions, packages, and triggers.  Prerequisite:  IS 325 or equivalent and SQL programming proficiency."285	IS 490	Special Topics in Systems	1 to 4	An in-depth treatment of a selected topic not normally treated extensively in other Information System courses.  The subject matter covered in this course will not be repeated in a future semester.286	IS 491	Independent Study/Information Systems	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned.  Prerequisites:  Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean. "287	IS 495	Computer Information Systems Practicum	2	"Capstone course for Computer Information Systems (CIS) majors.  Students form teams and each team spends an entire semester working to satisfy a set of requirements for a real-world organization.  Teams will gain experience in all phases of the systems development life cycle (SDLC) and project management.  Periodic written and oral presentations are required.  Success requires student teams to work as a cohesive unit which draws upon components of the entire CIS curriculum.  Prerequisites:  IS 310, IS 320, and IS 325."288	Criminal Justice			289	CJ 101	Introduction to Criminal Justice	4	"Provides an overview of the field of criminal justice, including the history, theory, and structure of the criminal justice system, with an emphasis on substantive and procedural criminal law, policing, prosecution/defense, the courts, and institutional and community corrections."290	CJ 204	Ethics in Criminal Justice	4	"Introduces the Criminal Justice student to ethical decision making in the criminal justice system Explores ethical dilemmas and challenges in policing, criminal courts and corrections, using both philosophical principles/theories and hands-on criminal justice issues and applications. Prerequisite: CJ 101."291	CJ 290	Selected Topics in Criminal Justice	1 to 4	Provides the opportunity to study criminal justice topics not normally covered in the existing curriculum.  Students may receive credit in future semesters for different topic areas. Prerequisite: CJ 101.292	CJ 310	Explaining Crime	4	"Presents an overview of the sociological study of crime and criminal justice, primarily in the contemporary United States. Material is broken down into four major topics: 1.) types and categories of contemporary criminal behavior; 2.) myths and facts about contemporary crime patterns; 3.) theories about why crimes are committed; 4.) how known crimes are dealt with by the U.S. criminal justice system. Prerequisite: CJ 101."293	CJ 322	Police and Society	4	"Introduces the functions, roles, and services of the various policing agencies in the United States. This includes the history, development, and role of the police as a component of the justice system, with particular attention to the relationship of the police to community, society, and related institutions of social control; societal control of the police as well as the influences of social change and urban decay and disorder on methods of policing. Prerequisite: CJ 101"294	CJ 350	Sexual Offenders	4	Introduces the criminal justice student to the causes and treatments of sexual offending behavior and the ways the criminal justice and mental health emerging issues of tracking monitoring persistent offenders.  Prerequisite:  CJ 101.295	CJ 456	Crime Mapping Technologies	4	"Examines geographic concepts and techniques as they apply to the study of crime. Uses sociological theories of spatial relations and urban studies (especially social ecology) to examine patterns of offending and victimization. Uses a range of data sets and computer applications, such as Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to map criminal behavior at the local, regional, state, and national levels. Explore policy implications of crime mapping capabilities. Prerequisite: CJ 101 and STA 100."296	CJ 460	Technological Surveillance and Constitutional Rights	4	"Provides an intensive survey of surveillance technologies and their use in crime prevention and prosecution.  Examines the legal and ethical issues of privacy, and how changes in technology are changing privacy debates and laws.  Prerequisites:  CJ 101 or equivalent, one 200 or 300 level criminal justice course, restricted to Juniors and Seniors.    "297	Economics			298	ECO 110	Microeconomics	4	"An indepth analysis of the operation of market forces in determining resource allocation in the private sector via the price system. Comprehensive theoretical models of the consumer, the producer, and market structure are developed. The student will become acquainted with the techniques whereby economists analyze, for purposes of public policy, such issues as environmental restrictions, public utility rate fixing and other price controls, commodity taxation, minimum wage laws, occupational licensing, and the economics of crime and punishment. Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."299	ECO 112	Macroeconomics	4	"A study of both classical and modern theory focusing on the determination of national income, employment, and the rate of inflation. The major versions of the classical and Keynesian systems are developed, including a review of the consumption function and the behavior of investment. Specific modern problems, such as the effects of wageprice controls, the institutional difficulties surrounding monetary and fiscal policymaking, and the growth/no growth issue, are discussed. "300	ECO 330	Economics of Aging	4	"Covers a variety of economic problems related to aging, from the viewpoints of both the individual and society as a whole. The economic characteristics of older persons will be examined, including labor force participation, financial circumstances, consumption patterns, and health status.  Major attention will be given to formal and informal economic security arrangements including individual saving programs, public and private pension systems, health insurance, and other legal and financial devices.  Longterm projections of the aged population, and its impact on the American economy, will be reviewed.  Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."301	ECO 425	Economics of the Environment	4	"An economic analysis of environmental protection.  Topics include: the economic nature of environmental problems; a description of air, water, and land pollution; global environmental issues; the economics of natural resource use, conservation, and recycling; and an analysis of the history and evolution of environmental policies in the United States.  Prerequisite:  ECO 110 or equivalent."302	ECO 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisite:  Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."303	Electrical Engineering			304	ECE 101	Introduction to Engineering I	4	"Introduction to the engineering profession. Emphasizes engineering problem-solving techniques and the ethical and societal responsibility of engineers, including introduction to the use of computers, freehand sketching, and an introduction to engineering design. Focuses on engineering methods, computer-aided design, and mathematical modeling using software applications (e.g., MATLAB, Mathematica). Team work skills, research methods, professional report writing, and public presentation techniques are taught. Engineering analysis, design, and reporting are required during a semester project."305	ECE 251	Digital Logic Design	4	"Fundamental and advanced concepts of digital logic.  Boolean algebra and functions.  Design and implementation of combinatorial and sequential logic, minimization techniques, number representation, and basic binary arithmetic.  Logic families and digital integrated circuits and use of CAD tools for logic design.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week."306	ECE 252	Computer Organization and Microprocessors	4	"Organization of computer systems:  processor, memory, I/O organization, instruction encoding and addressing modes.  Introduction to microprocessors and microcontrollers.  Design of hardware and software for microprocessor applications.  Assembly language programming.  Microprocessor system case studies.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  ECE 251."307	ECE 260	Electric Circuits	4	"Units and definitions.  Ohm’s Law and Kirchhoff’s Laws.  Analysis of resistive circuits.  Circuit analysis using:  Nodal and mesh methods, Norton and Thevenin theorems, and voltage divider.  Transient and sinusoidal steady-state response of circuits containing resistors, capacitors, and inductors.  Prerequisite: PHY 201T, PHY 201L and Pre/Corequisite: MAT 230."308	ECE 281	Electrical and Computer Engineering Seminar I	1	"Overview of the fields of electrical engineering and computer engineering.  Various sub-fields within EE and CoE will be explored, with emphasis on how they are interrelated.  Issues relevant to careers in EE and CoE (e.g., typical tasks performed by EEs and CoEs) will be explored."309	ECE 301	Signals and Systems	4	"Provides an introduction to continuous-time and discrete-time signals and linear systems.  Topics covered include time-domain descriptions (differential and difference equations, convolution) and frequency-domain descriptions (Fourier series and transforms, transfer function, frequency response, Z transforms, and Laplace transforms).  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites:  MAT 230 and a grade of C or better in ECE 260."310	ECE 315	Electronics I	4	"Introduction to electronics concentrating on the fundamental devices (diode, transistor, operational amplifier, logic gate) and their basic applications; modeling techniques; elementary circuit design based on devices, laboratory exercises.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  ECE 260, Corequisite:  ECE 251."311	ECE 323	Electromagnetics	3	"Fundamentals of electromagnetic fields, Maxwell’s Equations, plane waves, reflections.  Application to transmission lines, antennas, propagation, electromagnetic interference, electronics packaging, wireless communications.  Prerequisite:  ECE 301 and MAT 253."312	ECE 332	Semiconductor Devices	3	"Basic theory of semiconductors, p-n junctions, bipolar junction transistors, junction and MOS field effect devices, device design and modeling, fabrication.  Prerequisites: PHY 201T, PHY 201L, CHE 110T and CHE 110L or equivalent. "313	ECE 351	Digital Systems Design	4	"Synchronous sequential circuit design.  Algorithmic state machine method; state reduction; control-datapath circuit partitioning.  Design of sequential arithmetic circuits.  Memory interfacing; bus-based design.  Specification and synthesis of digital systems using hardware description language and implementation using programmable logic devices.  Simulation, analysis, testing, and verification of digital systems.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  ECE 251."314	ECE 352	Computer Architecture	3	"RISC machines and instruction set architectures, computer arithmetic, performance evaluation, single cycle and multi-cycle datapaths, pipelined architecture, static and dynamic scheduling, instruction-level parallelism, advanced pipelining, superscalar and super-pipelined processors, memory hierarchy and organization, I/O, compiler issues.  Co-requisite:  ECE 351."315	ECE 359	Computer Networks	3	"Introduce principles and practices in computer and communication networks.  Emphasis is on the design, implementation, and management of IP backbone networks (the Internet), wired/wireless LAN’s , and mobile communication networks.  Topics include:  major network implementations, Internet protocols, LAN standards, network elements (switches, routers, bridges, and gateway), EMS/NMS, network security, and other current research topics.  Prerequisite:  MAT 370 or equivalent. "316	ECE 361	Control Systems	4	"Introduction to analysis, design and modeling of control systems.  LaPlace transforms, transfer functions and transient analysis.  Concepts of stability; polar and log-frequency plots.  Numerical simulation and design of simple control systems.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  ECE 301."317	ECE 377	Communications Systems	3	Fundamentals of communications systems.  Modulation and demodulation methods.  Characteristics of modern analog and digital communications methods.  Prerequisite:  ECE 301.318	ECE 382	Seminar II	1	"Provides an overview of the professional aspects of the fields of Electrical Engineering and Computer Engineering.  Topics to be covered include:  typical career paths in ECE, engineering ethics, resume writing and job search techniques, preparing for graduate school, professional engineer license, etc."319	ECE 387	Design Lab	3	"Students will complete a series of assigned design projects that rely on background in the areas of microprocessors, electronics, and signals & systems.  Lecture will focus on various aspects of the design process as well as discussion of component characteristics.  Prerequisite:  ECE 315."320	ECE 402	Signal Processing	3	"Discrete time and frequency analysis of linear systems.  Random signals, correlation functions, power spectrum, and design of elementary digital filters. Prerequisite:  ECE 301."321	ECE 416	Analog Circuit Design	3	"Active and passive circuits, bias point and small signal analysis. Frequency response and transient characteristics of electronic circuits. Feedback and stability. Electronic circuit design and system applications (multistage amplifiers, active filters, etc.), numerical simulations. Technical Elective."322	ECE 462	Control Systems II	3	"Conventional and state variable techniques for the analysis and design of analog and digital control systems, z-transform, sampled data systems, discrete state variable techniques, numerical simulation, and computer-aided design of control systems.  Prerequisite:  ECE 361."323	ECE 487	Senior Project I	4	"Design projects in cooperation with local industry and other external clients.  Specifications, proposal, time schedule, paper design.  Periodic design reviews with client, written and oral progress reports, final presentation.  Prerequisite:  ECE 387 and senior standing."324	ECE 488	Senior Project II	4	Continuation of EE 487.  Prototype fabrication and test.  Demonstration and documentation of functioning system delivered to client.  Prerequisite:  ECE 487.325	ECE 490	Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering	2 to 4	"An in-depth study of topics selected from and based on new developments in communications technology and related areas.  Topics may include areas of secure communications, mobile communications, image transmission and optical signal processing, computer-aided design, analysis of communications links and networks and integrated services digital network standards."326	ECE 491	Independent Study/Electrical and Computer Engineering	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned.  Prerequisites:  Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."327	Electrical Engineering Technology			328	ETC 101	Fundamentals of Electrical and Computer Engineering Technology	4	"Introduction to basic circuit laws and analysis, transient circuits and first order circuits. Introduction to electronic devices and linear electronics. Examine the concepts of power systems, programmable logic controllers, and transistor switches. May not be taken for credit by graduates of associate degree programs in electrical/electronic or computer engineering technology. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Corequisite: MAT 120 or equivalent or permission of instructor. Cross-listed with CET 101. "329	ETC 102	Electric Circuits	4	"Units and definitions. Ohm’s Law and Kirchhoff’s Laws. Analysis of resistive circuits. Circuit analysis using superposition, nodal and mesh methods, Norton Thevenin theorems, and current and voltage divider rules. Transient and sinusoidal steady state response of circuits containing resistors, capacitors, and incutors.   Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Cross listed with CET 102."330	ETC 103	Electronics I	4	"Introduction to semiconductors, conductors, and insulators. Analysis of transistors, diodes, and their related application in rectifier and amplifier circuits. Waveform interpretation, ACDC load lines, biasing techniques, small signal amplifiers, and h parameters. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: ETC 102 or permission of instructor.  All students who have an EET associate degree may not enroll in this course for credit. Cross listed with CET 103."331	ETC 203	Electronics II	4	"Introduction to operational amplifier circuits incorporating feedback.  Amplifier configurations, feedback amplifiers, applications of OpAmps in analog computers, and active filters. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: ETC 103 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  All students who have an EET associate degree may not enroll for this course for credit. Cross listed with CET 203"332	ETC 210	Digital Systems I	4	"Fundamentals and advanced concepts of digital logic. Boolean algebra and functions. Design and implementation of combinatorial and sequential logic, minimization techniques, number representation, basic binary arithmetic and finite state machines. Logic families and digital integrated circuits and use of CAD tools for logic design. Prerequisite: ETC 102 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  All students who have an EET associate degree may not enroll in this course for credit.  Cross listed with CET 210."333	ETC 215	Sustainable Energy Systems	2	"An introduction to sustainable energy systems.  Topics include solar energy, wind energy, fuel cell technology, biomass energy, geothermal energy, clean coal technology, ocean energy, hydroelectric power, and nuclear power.  Two hours of lecture per week.  Cross-listed with CTC 215 and MTC 215."334	ETC 216	Electronic Communications I	4	"Introduction of analog electronic communication systems. Study of power measurements, signal types, methods of signal analysis and signal generation.  Study of analog communication systems including both amplitude and angle modulation.  Study concepts of radio and video transmission, as well as an introduction of digital modulation techniques.  Prerequisite: ETC 102 or equivalent or permission of instructor. "335	ETC 265	Sensor Technology	4	"Fundamental principles of sensing.  General performance sensor characteristics related to the measurement process.  Operation principles and the design of the essential sensor systems with a focus on the semiconductor material sensors.  Applications of sensor systems.  Prerequisites: PHY 101T, PHY 101L, and ETC 102 or equivalent. "336	ETC 288	Alternative Energy	2	"Principles and techniques associated with the methods of energy extraction from solar, wind, geothermal and biomass sources. Power management, economic development and environmental considerations will be discussed. "337	ETC 290	Introduction to Nanotechnology	4	"An introductory course covering fundamentals of nanotechnology and its applications.  Course content will cover diverse nanosystems including carbon nanotubes, semiconductor quantum dots, nanosensensors, molecular machines, and nanomedicine. The course will also survey the operation principles of the instruments used for nanostructures characterization and nanofabrication techniques.  Prerequisite: PHY 101T and PHY 101L; CHE 110T and CHE 110L or permission of instructor.  Cross listed with MTC 290."338	ETC 299	Quality Control and Workplace Issues	2	"To provide a broad educational understanding of the impact of engineering solutions in a global and societal context along with a knowledge of contemporary issues and career opportunities.  Also, focus will be placed on the process controls necessary for the practice of electrical and computer engineering.  Cross listed with CET 299."339	ETC 300	Tools in Technology	2	Introduction to the field of CAD (Computer Aided Design) in the electrical engineering technology field.  Will cover the proper design of schematic drawings and the techniques of designing printed circuit boards.  Prerequisites: ETC 102 and ETC 110 or equivalents.340	ETC 308 	Electrical Power Systems I	2	"Fundamentals of power system analysis and design will be studied. Both the theory and modeling of power systems will be covered. Topics include power transformers, transmission-line parameters, steady-state operation of transmission lines, power flow and power system controls. Two hours of lecture per week. Prerequisite: ETC 102 Corequisite: MAT 230."341	ETC 316	Electronic Communications II	4	"Study of communication signals, digital modulation techniques, telephony, digital, RF and cellular communications. Optical fiber and satellite communications are also introduced.  Prerequisite: ETC 216 or equivalent."342	ETC 330	Assistive Technology	2	"Introduction to the fundamentals of assistive technology for people with physical disabilities. Rehabilitation engineering with an emphasis on mechanical devices used to enhance mobility and manipulation, improving physical interaction with the environment. Topics include: prosthetics, manual wheelchairs, power wheelchairs, and alternative methods for computer access. Two hours of lecture per week. Cross listed with MTC 330."343	ETC 331	Control Systems	4	"Basic control systems studied using Laplace transforms.  Principles of electromechanical control systems (electrical and mechanical), measuring means, components and their characteristics, and controller characteristics.  Analysis of a control system by the frequency/phase responses and stability criteria.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: ETC 104 or equivalent."344	ETC 342	Microprocessor and Embedded Systems Programming and Design	4	Programming and microprocessor for embedded systems application.  Includes an introduction to interfacing components and hardware of the microprocessor.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: ETC 110 or permission of instructor.  No prior microprocessors background needed.  Cross listed with CET 342.345	ETC 345	Sequential Logic Design	4	"Introduces advanced sequential logic design through the use of hardware description languages. Students will obtain hands-on experience about digital systems in Hardware languages such as Verilog and VHDL. FPGA will be extensively used in the lab. The functionality, limitations, and usage of standard sequential components and PLDs will be discussed. Various CAD tools will be used for modeling, synthesizing and implementing several digital systems. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: ETC 210 or equivalent. Cross listed with CET 345."346	ETC 355	Introduction to Nanosystems VLSI	4	"Introduces CMOS devices and manufacturing technology. CMOS logic gates and their layout will be introduced. Propagation delay, noise margins, and power dissipation will be studied. Students will gain knowledge on memory design. Various CAD tools will be used. Four hours of lecture per week. Prerequisite: ETC 210 or equivalent. Cross listed with CET 355."347	ETC 356	Programmable Controllers	2	Use of programmable controllers to create relay logic ladder diagrams for the development of control systems.  348	ETC 391	Fiber Optics	4	"Principles and analysis of fiber optic components and systems, fiber optic sensors, integrated optoelectronics and applications of fiber optics in telecommunications and instrumentation.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.   Prerequisite: One physics course with optics and/or permission of the instructor. "349	ETC 392	Micro- and Nano-Electromechanical Systems	4	"This course introduces the student to the emerging field of Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and to the more advanced level of miniaturization known as Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS).  Topics will include introduction of physical scaling laws, essential electrical and mechanical concepts, methods of fabrication and packaging of MEMS, principles of micro-actuation, emergence of nanoscale systems, visualization, and applications of micro and nano systems.  Prerequisite:  PHY 101T and PHY 101L; CHE 110T and CHE 110L; or equivalent.  Cross listed with MTC 392."350	ETC 394	Nanoscale Materials	4	"Fundamental aspects of Nanoscale materials, including electronic states and electrical properties, optical properties and interactions of nanoscale materials, ultrafast dynamics of metal nanoparticles, magnetic and magneto transport properties. Prerequisite: PHY 101T, PHY 101L, CHE 110T and CHE 110L or equivalent. Cross-listed with MTC 394."351	ETC 395	Semiconductor Microfabrication	4	"Processes specific for the Silicon fabrication of VLSI circuits. Crystal growth and crystal structure. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth, thermal oxidation, etching, metal deposition diffusion, ion implantation and photolithography. Process integration, MOS transistor fabrication, yield and reliability. Prerequisite: PHY 101T, PHY 101L, CHE 110T, CHE 110L or equivalent. Cross-listed with MTC 395. "352	ETC 397	Fundamentals of Photovoltaic Energy	4	"Rationale for renewable and photovoltaic (PV) energy utilization.  Fundamentals of Semiconductor Physics.  The physics of solar cells and solar cell operation.  Technologies and materials used to fabricate solar cells.  Fabrication of photovoltaic modules and solar generators.  Measurement of PV element parameters.  Prerequisite: MAT 121 and PHY 101T, and PHY 101L."353	ETC 416	Data Communication & Computer Network Technology	4	"The principles and techniques of data and computer communications are covered in detail in this course.  Topics include principles of data transmission, data encoding, digital communication techniques, transmission codes, error detection and correction, protocols, communication networks, interfacing and architecture.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Cross listed with CET 416."354	ETC 419	Satellite Communication	2	"Principles of satellite communications, techniques of transmitting speech, data and video using satellites.  Prerequisite: ETC 316 or permission of instructor."355	ETC 421	Wireless Communication Systems	4	"Study of the theory and the techniques used in the implementation of wireless communication systems.  Principle and analysis of mobile communication systems, wireless LAN, personal communication networks and Land-Mobile/satellite communications systems are also included.  Prerequisite:  ETC 316."356	 			357	ETC 423	Microprocessor Interfacing	4	Analysis of microprocessor interfacing with operational hardware. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: ETC 110 or equivalent and ETC 342 or permission of instructor.  Cross listed with CET 423.358	ETC 429	"Microprocessors, Microprogramming and Computer Architecture"	4	Design of microprocessor and computer central processing units.  Stresses the architecture and microprogramming of the processor.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  ETC 110 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  Cross listed with CET 429.359	ETC 431	PC Integration and Maintenance	4	This course stresses the architecture and design of personal computers and emphasizes the use of diagnostic hardware and software to evaluate PC systems in actual lab situations.  Two hours of lecture and four hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: ETC 311 or ETC 342 or CS 220.  Cross listed with CET 431.360	ETC 432	Process Control and Design of Experiments	4	"Quality philosophy and fundamental quality tools.  Process flow diagrams, control charts for variable measurement, process sampling and chart interpretation.  Methods for process optimization through single and multiple factor experimental designs.  Prerequisites: MAT 121, PHY 101T, and PHY 101L.  Cross listed with MTC 432.  "361	ETC 433	Automatic Control Systems	4	"Transfer function approach to the analysis and design of feedback control systems. Use of Bode diagrams, and root locus plots to predict system performances. Analog and digital simulation of industrial control system problems.  Prerequisite: ETC 331 or equivalent."362	ETC 435	Digital Control and Robotics	4	"Discrete time systems and transform sampling and reconstruction, statespace technique and digital stimulation, stability of digital control systems, digital filtering and digital compensator design, discretetime optimal control, and applications in robotics.  This course is the capstone for the control emphasis which requires working on a team project using a robot arm in place of the laboratory, with an oral and written presentation at the end.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: ETC 331 and one course in computer programming."363	ETC 437	Digital Filters	4	"Review of discretetime linear systems and random processes, ztransforms, difference equations, and statespace formulations. Discrete Fourier analysis and FFT algorithms, including discussions of recursive and nonrecursive filter transformations, FIR transversal and Kalman filters.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: MAT 122."364	ETC 444	Special Topics in Microprocessor/Digital	1 to 4	Seminar on the stateoftheart in microprocessor and digital techniques.  Topics will vary as technology changes. May be taken more than once for credit provided topics are different. Prerequisite: ETC 110 or equivalent or permission of instructor.  Cross listed with CET 444.365	ETC 445	System-on-Chip Embedded Systems I	4	"Introduces advanced digital design through the use of hardware description languages for the specification, simulation, and synthesis of complex digital systems. Students will obtain hands-on experience about System-on-Chip embedded systems. FPGA will be extensively used in the lab. Both Verilog and VHDL, the two most widely used digital modeling languages for the description of digital systems at the board and component level will be studied. Structural (device interconnection), dataflow (register transfer level), and behavioral (algorithmic) models will be utilized. Various CAD tools will be used for modeling, synthesizing, and implementing several digital systems. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite:  ETC 342 or ETC 265 or equivalent. Cross listed with CET 445. "366	ETC 446	Programmable Logic Devices	4	"Synchronous sequential circuit design. Algorithmic state machine method; state reduction; control-data path circuit partitioning. Design of sequential arithmetic circuits. Memory interfacing; bus-based design. Specification and synthesis of digital systems using hardware description language and implementation using programmable logic devices. Simulation, analysis, testing, and verification of digital systems. Prerequisite: ETC 210 or equivalent. "367	ETC 466	System-on-Chip Embedded Systems II	4	"Hardware and software concepts in the design and analysis of embedded systems will be covered. Memory types and peripheral interfaces used in embedded systems will be considered. Performance analysis of embedded systems design will be studied. Design tradeoffs made by different models of embedded systems will be identified. Students will obtain hands-on experience about System-on-Chip embedded systems. FPGA will be extensively used in the lab. Either Verilog or VHDL, the two most widely used digital modeling languages for the description of digital systems at the board and component level will be studied as well as C programming language. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: ETC 445 or equivalent. Cross listed with CET 466. "368	ETC 480	Electrical Technology Senior Project I	2	"This is the first of two twocredit courses which must be taken as a pair.  Extensive investigation, preparation, and development of a design project incorporating concepts from senior level courses.  A written report is required.  At the end of first semester, student should have all information and material required to complete the project in the following semester."369	ETC 481	Electrical Technology Senior Project II	2	"This course involves the full implementation, testing, troubleshooting, and final demonstration of the senior project as proposed in ETC 480. An updated final report shall also accompany the final project. Note: Credit given only if ETC 480 has been successfully completed. Prerequisite: ETC 480."370	ETC 483	Optical Communications	4	"Principles and techniques associated with the transmission of optical radiation in waveguides (fibers) and free space, low and high power optical sources, internal (direct) and external (indirect) modulations.  Fiber optical waveguide and characteristics of free space, homodyne and hetrodyne detection, and design of optical communication systems. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  This is the capstone course for the concentration in communications and requires working on a team project in place of laboratory assignments with oral and written presentation at the completion of the project.  The written report will include analysis, design and management of the project.  Prerequisite: ETC 391 or permission of instructor."371	ETC 484	Thin Film Processing	4	"Thin film synthesis: the fundamentals of crystal structures, the basic nucleation and growth mechanisms.  Processes and technologies used for the thin film fabrication” chemical vapor deposition (CVD), Metal-organic CVD, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), Plasma Assisted-MBE, sputtering, evaporation, etc., thin film growth equipment operation principles and the fundamentals of vacuum technology and gas delivery systems.  Techniques for the monitoring and characterization of thin film parameters during the growth (in-situ) and after the growth (ex-situ).  Prerequisite: PHY 101T, PHY 101L, CHE 110T and CHE 110L or equivalent.  Cross listed with MTC 484."372	ETC 490	Special Topics in Communication Technology	2	"An in-depth study of topics selected from and based on new developments in communications technology and related areas.  Topics may include areas of secure communications, mobile communications, image transmission and optical signal processing, computer-aided design, analysis of communications links and networks and integrated services digital network standards.  Prerequisites:  ETC 316 and permission of instructor."373	ETC 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study of a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, methods of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned.  Prerequisites:  Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area.  "374	ETC 494	COOP Assignment	2 or 4	Provides 14 weeks of supervised experience in an industrial or government installation applying technology knowledge towards the solution of engineering technology problems and developing abilities required in the student's career.  At least two reports and two supervisors' evaluations are required.  A minimum of 60 contact hours of industrial work is required per credit hour.  May be taken repetitively up to a maximum of four credits.  Prerequisite: Permission of employer and dean.375	ETC 495	Nanotechnology Research	3	"This course introduces students with the scientific, technical and methodological aspects of nanotechnology research.  Students will be required to work either individually or in a group on a research project and integrate knowledge of their majors into the evolving field of nanotechnology.  Emphasis is placed on addressing interdisciplinary, economical, ethical, and environmental aspects of nanotechnology. "376	Engineering Science 			377	ESC 110	Introduction to Engineering	3	"Students will be introduced to the engineering profession. Lectures will cover what engineering is, how engineers solve problems, the design aspects of engineering, and what types of projects engineers in different disciplines work through. The course will be 2 hours of class lectures and a 2 hour laboratory each week. Prerequisites: Admission to a B.S. in Engineering program or permission by instructor. "378	ESC 120	Design Tools and Processes	3	"Introduction to the basic tools and techniques in engineering design. Fundamentals of graphical communication, including sketching, computer-aided design, and parametric modeling. Two hours of lecture and a 2-hour laboratory each week. Prerequisites: Admission to a B.S. in Engineering program or permission by instructor."379	ESC 210	Engineering Mechanics-Statics	3	Equilibrium of coplanar force systems; analysis of frames and trusses; noncoplanar force systems; friction; centroids and moments of inertia. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: MAT 152 and PHY 201T and PHY 201L.380	ESC 220	Material Science	3	"The fundamentals of material science are presented for the following topical areas:  Physical Metallurgy, Mechanical Metallurgy, Testing of Materials Ceramics, Optical and Electronic Materials, Plastics and Polymers, Nanoscale Materials, Composite Materials and Adhesives.  The use of these fundamentals in design and manufacturing applications and environments is explored. Prerequisites: PHY 201T, PHY 201L, CHE 130T and CHE 130L.  Three lecture hours per week.    "381	ESC 230	Mechanics of Materials	4	"Effect of shape and composition on mechanics of materials. Moments of inertia in beams, shear forces, beam deflection, beam and column design, torsion of shafts, thermal expansion, and pressure vessels. Experimental analysis of solid materials subjected to loads.  Measurement and analysis of stress, strain, and deflection of mechanical and structural components. Three hours of lecture and two hours of lab per week. Restricted to Civil Engineering and Mechanical Engineering majors. "382	ESC 240	Engineering Mechanics-Dynamics	3	"Kinematics and kinetics of particles and rigid bodies using vector analysis. Force-mass-acceleration; work and energy, impulse and momentum, translating and rotating coordinate systems. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: PHY 201T, PHY 201L, MAT 230, ESC 210."383	ESC 370	Design of Engineering Experiments	3	"Modern Methodologies for design of experiments and data analysis.  This includes Analysis of Variance (ANOVA), factorial design, and response surface methods.  The course is intended for engineers and it deals with the types of experiments that are frequently conducted in industrial settings.  The principles taught in the course are applicable to all phases of engineering work including new product design and development, process development, and manufacturing process improvement.  Prerequisites: Junior standing in Mechanical Engineering and permission of the instructor."384	English			385	ENG 090	Introduction to College Writing	0	"For students not meeting English 101 placement requirements.  English 090 will prepare students for English 101 (Freshman Composition) by addressing fundamental writing issues at sentence, paragraph, and essay levels, with emphasis on student-generated writing and model essays.  Only S/U grades are assigned for this course."386	ENG 101	Freshman Composition	4	"An introductory expository writing course.  Students will write a variety of short essays, culminating in a research essay.  Emphasis is on close reading, discovering worthwhile topics, drafting and revising, and evaluation and presentation of evidence.  Students will also be evaluated on the development and implementation of an oral presentation.  Meets new General Education Basic Communication requirement.  Prerequisite:  COMPASS Placement Test score of 68 or higher or successful completion of ENG 090."387	ENG 105	Critical Reading and Writing	4	"Students will write critical essays based on readings.  The focus of this class will be critical reading and response.  Students will be exposed to research methods including information gathering, source evaluation and analysis, synthesizing ideas and evidence and use of documentation.  Readings for this class may be topical or organized around a theme.  An oral presentation based on one of the course topics will be required and evaluated.  Meets new General Education Basic Communication requirement.  Prerequisites:  ENG 101 or appropriate placement test score."388	ENG 110	Introduction to Literature	4	"An introduction to the critical reading of various literary genres, with attention to the interpretation and evaluation of fiction, drama and creative non-fiction. Readings will represent a pan-historical approach to the study of literature and will include non-Western texts. The course will not be arranged by theme or topic; it is designed to cover a broad range of issues, themes, and topics through the study of various literary genres. This course provides a critical and aesthetic introduction to the major genres of literature. "389	ENG 205	Creative Writing	4	"Through writing prose fiction or poetry, students develop competency in narration, description, characterization, and other writing skills developing a personal “voice”.  As students write, critique, and rewrite, they learn the skill of selfcriticism which is a necessary part of all writing.  Meets new General Education Arts requirement."390	ENG 211	The Arts and Cultural Revolution	4	"A study of one non-Western culture with emphasis on how its beliefs and customs are represented in the arts, including literature and visual arts, during periods of rapid technological and cultural change.  Comparisons to parallel Western works will be made to clarify cultural difference.  The culture studied will vary; current subjects are modern Japan, revolutionary Mexico, Russia since the Bolshevik Revolution, and modern Israel."391	ENG 310	Topics in American Literature	4	"A study of a major period, genre, figure, or theme in American literature. Typical topics include science fiction, twentieth century poetry, slavery and the Civil War, and the image of women in American literature.  May be taken more than once as topics change. Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."392	ENG 311	Topics in World Literature	4	"A study of a major period, genre, figure, or theme in world literature. Typical topics include the modern European novel, technology in literature, Shakespeare, modernism, and women and power.  May be taken more than once as topics change. Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."393	ENG 312	Studies in the Short Story	4	"Examines the short story as a literary genre.  The emphasis is on interpretation, though selections may vary each semester.  Literary questions provide the occasion for students to develop reading and writing skills and to explore how literature and composition interact. Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."394	ENG 320	Recent American Poetry	4	"Begins with several major poets of the 1920's: W.C. Williams, T.S. Eliot, and Wallace Stevens.  These poets serve as background for the study of poetry since World War II.  Some of the poets studied will be chosen by the class.  Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."395	ENG 331	Black Voices	4	"Students will become acquainted with several major figures of AfricanAmerican Literature and will examine their works in light of some of the political, cultural, and sociological influences evident within these works. Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."396	ENG 350	Dramatic Literature	4	"The playwright is a shaper of events as well as a wordsmith.  Plays from several cultural eras will be studied to clarify the dramatist's careful balance of plot, character, idea, language, and spectacle. Film and video versions of plays will supplement text study. Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."397	ENG 360	Reading the Film	4	"By accepting film as a legitimate form of literary expression, we utilize the tools of literary analysis which allow us to ""read"" the images of the cinema.  This course will review some of the components of the language of literature and will introduce the basic elements of film technique.  Students will be asked to ""read,"" understand, and critically evaluate the translation of literary elements into the language of film.  Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."398	ENG 361	Film Direction:  Alfred Hitchcock	2 to 4	"Encourages students to critically examine the facets of the film image.  Using Alfred Hitchcock as a model, students will be presented with the range of options available to a film director and shown some of the techniques employed to make a text (story) visual.  Our focus will be on the rhetoric and style found in the language of the cinema as represented in the work of Alfred Hitchcock. Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."399	ENG 375	The Novel	4	"A study of the nature and evolution of the novel, including the social conditions that stimulated its growth and the special characteristics and possibilities of the genre.  Emphasis will fall on British and American novels from the 18th century to the present, including trends such as the novel of manners, realism, symbolic and impressionistic realism, and recent experiments (""fabulation,"" the nonfiction novel). Meets new General Education Humanities requirement."400	ENG 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."401	Entrepreneurship			402	ENT 375	Introduction to Entrepreneurship	4	"Introduction to entrepreneurship emphasizing the critical role of recognizing and creating opportunities in small business, new ventures, corporate projects, and other organizational settings.  Topics include attributes of entrepreneurs, entrepreneurial careers, idea conceptualization, introduction to marketing and finance, profitability, opportunity evaluation, and introduction to business plan writing."403	ENT 378	Entrepreneurial Technology Management	4	"Technology provides entrepreneurs with a vast, evolving medium for engaging in all phases of business activity.  New business opportunities are literally evolving with the introduction of new technological developments.  As pioneers in the exciting new dimension of business, students will study trends that have evolved, learn what methods and standards currently exist, learn how to analyze existing business web activity, and develop web business strategies for launching their own business activities on the net.  Both classroom and computer laboratory are integrated providing a real-time learning by doing environment. "404	ENT 485	Business Planning for Entrepreneurs	4	"Focuses on planning activities that support entrepreneurial ventures including small businesses, franchises, non-profits, and internal corporate projects.  Emphasis on generating a business plan for innovative entrepreneurial ventures and concepts.  In depth study of written and oral documentation needed to generate a complete quantitative and qualitative business plan.  Communication of financial, business, and rhetorical arguments will be covered.  Prerequisite: ENT 375 and FIN 378."405				406	ENT 492	Entrepreneurship Internship	4	"Supervised, discipline based experience in business organization.  Emphasis on application, process and techniques used by business to sustain and promote growth.  Specific skills and competencies needed to be a successful decision-maker are targeted.  Oversight provided by the School internship coordinator, min-semester evaluation and a final, comprehensive written report are required.  Prerequisite: ENT 375, ENT 378, and Permission of Instructor.  Only S/U grades are awarded for this course."407	Finance			408	FIN 302	Financial Management Principles	4	"General principles of corporate finance are presented. Topics include: the tax environment, an overview of financial planning and control, working capital management, and forms of longterm financing. Objectives include an analysis of responsibilities and functions performed by financial analysts, whether representing a firm, a financial institution, an investment officer, or financial/management consultant.  Prerequisite: ACC 201 or equivalent or permission of instructor."409	FIN 332	Fundamentals of Investments	4	"The investment of capital funds is a complex field and topics studied include: investment and risk, determination of investment policy, types of security investments, sources of investment information, the broker, the stock market, and portfolio management."410	FIN 341	Financial Institutions	4	Analysis of financial institutions with emphasis on their sources of funds and operating characteristics. Emphasis also is given to the role of commercial banks in the money market and the relationship of the other major financial institutions to the commercial banks.411	FIN 343	Personal Finance	4	"This course provides the informational and decision-making tools needed for planning and implementing a successful personal financial plan.  It provides an overview of personal and family financial planning with an emphasis on financial recordkeeping, planning your spending, tax planning, consumer credit, making buying decisions, purchasing insurance, selecting investments and retirement and estate planning."412	FIN 378	Finance for Entrepreneurs	4	"Focus on financial planning, analysis, and find raising to seed a small business through venture, angel, investment, and commercial capital sources.  Topics include financial management for entrepreneurs over the life of the business including start-up financing, financial planning for growth, going public, selling off, bankruptcy, and other pertinent financing topics.  Communication of entrepreneurial funding ideas through written and oral forms will also be discussed.  Prerequisite: ENT 375"413	FIN 411	Financial Management Problems	4	"An indepth financial analysis of problems experienced by different firms is pursued using actual cases and outside reading to supplement text data. Studies will cover value of cash flow, capital planning, breakeven analysis, inventory control, financial structure, cost of capital, external growth, failure, reorganization, and liquidation.  Prerequisite: FIN 302."414	FIN 420	Financial Planning and Control	4	Analytical techniques and procedures for dealing with capital structure problems of business. Emphasis will be on capital budgeting techniques and methods of ranking investment alternatives available to business. The student should become familiar with different theories of probabilities to minimize risk in financial planning and control. Prerequisite: FIN 411 or equivalent.415	FIN 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member. The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area. "416	FIN 492	Finance Internship	4	"Supervised, discipline related experience in a business organization.  Emphasis is on application, process, and techniques used by business to sustain business and promote growth.  Specific skills and competencies needed to be a successful decision-maker will be targeted.  Oversight will be provided by the School internship coordinator and the sponsoring organization.  Periodic meetings with the supervisor, mid-semester evaluation, and a final, comprehensive written report are required.  Prerequisite:  Permission of instructor."417	First Year Seminar			418	FYS 101	First Year Seminar	1	"To assist the first-time, full-time students in their academic and social integration of the college experience, this course will focus on accessing support services that enhance study skills and academic learning. Sessions on time management, stress management, study strategies and financial management are explored. Strategic reading and lecture notes, test taking and wellness activities are also addressed to assist students in meeting the academic demands of college life. Community service and civic responsibility are also addressed through this first year seminar. "419	Fitness			420	See Health and Physical Activity			421	French			422	FRE 101	Elementary French	4	"Introduces the basics of French language and culture.  The student will develop the four language skills of listening, speaking, reading and writing through practice in pronunciation, listening comprehension and reading and writing of short passages.  Integrated into the course is an introduction to the French way of life.  Meets the new General Education Foreign Language requirement."423	FRE 102	Intermediate French	4	"This course continues the basic grammar of FRE 101 to develop proficiency in French.  It refines and polishes the four basic language acquisition skills: aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing.  The focus is communication: listening, understanding, and responding in French.  Instruction is primarily in French. "424	General Studies			425	GEN 300	Academic Skills Enhancement	1	"To help students reinforce the universal foundations of academic success, including critical thinking, study skills and time management.  Additionally, to help students discover and benefit from their own individual strengths and experience.  Assignments include readings from a variety of sources, self-reflection papers, and model assignments from different academic disciplines.  To use this course as a first step toward a more rewarding academic career, students will produce a personalized Learning Plan and design and participate in a community service project. Credits total in their chosen areas of concentration. "426	Health and Physical Activity			427	FIT 100	Introduction to Fitness	1	"Learn concepts of cardio, weight and flexibility training for long-term cardiovascular health, strength and endurance.  The basic principles of exercise and the proper utilization of fitness equipment will be demonstrated and applied."428	FIT 101	Concepts of Aerobic Training	1	"Learn concepts of aerobic training for weight loss, increased flexibility and for long-term cardiovascular health, strength and endurance.  The basic principles of exercise and the proper utilization of fitness equipment will be demonstrated and applied."429	FIT 102	Athletic Conditioning	1	"Concepts of total athletic conditioning, including cardiovascular, strength and agility training, through application of dynamic warm-up, flexibility, plyometrics and interval training."430	HLT 200	Peer Health Education I	2	"An introduction to the field of peer health education with an emphasis on the development of a wellness lifestyle and self responsibility.  Communication and interpersonal skills needed to peer counsel will be introduced.  Course topics include drug, tobacco and alcohol use/abuse as well as sexually transmitted diseases.  Students will be involved in campus outreach activities such as informational displays and data collection."431	REC 101	Introductory Racquetball	1	"Learn basic skills, strategies and rules for competitive recreational play; utilize racquetball as a primary or secondary source for cardiovascular health, flexibility and endurance."432	REC 102	Introductory Golf	1	"Learn basic skills, strategies and rules for competitive recreational play; utilize golf as a primary or secondary source for cardiovascular health, flexibility and endurance."433	Health Information Management 			434	HIM 100	Introduction to the Health Information Management Field	3	"Introduction to the health information field and professional ethics. Regulatory, certification, and licensure requirements for content and maintenance of hospital health records. Common healthcare statistics related to hospital and physician performance.  Laboratory and lecture.   Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week."435	HIM 111	Medical Terminology	3	"The language of medicine including Latin/Greek prefixes, suffixes and root words.  Diagnostic and procedural terms will be included."436	HIM 212	Pathophysiology for Health Information Management	3	"A study of major disease processes including their symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment.  Students will learn which diagnostic tests are used as well as the appropriate surgical techniques.  Basic pharmacology and the most commonly used drugs will be discussed."437	HIM 220	Data Management and Analysis for Health Information	3	Use of database management software to manage and query health care data. Use of spreadsheet software to import data form health care databases. Data presentation principles. Calculation and use of special statistics related to the health care setting. These statistics are used for health facility planning and administration and for epidemiology. Pre/Co-requisite: CSC 311C.438	HIM 305	Inpatient Coding and Classification	3	"Coding and classification schemes used for hospital inpatients will be discussed.  Special emphasis will be placed on the International Classification of Disease-10th-Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM) and International Classification of Disease-10th-Procedure Coding System (ICD-10-PCS).  ICD-9CM will be discussed as legacy. Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites: HIM 100/111/212, BIO 215T, BIO 215L, BIO 216T, and BIO 216L.  "439	HIM 306	Outpatient Coding and Classification	3	"Coding and classification schemes used for outpatients in hospitals, ambulatory care centers and physician offices will be discussed.  Special emphasis will be placed on Current Procedural Terminology, 4th edition (CPT-4), and reimbursement classifications.  Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week.  Prerequisites: BIO 215T, BIO 215L, BIO 216T and BIO 216L.  Co-requisite:  Completion of or concurrent enrollment in HIM 305."440	HIM 309	Legal Aspects of Health Information	3	"Overview of the legal system, civil procedure, rules of evidence, tort law, corporation law, contracts, and antitrust laws. Discussion of specific laws related to health information such as patient consent, the legal health record, privacy, security, access, disclosure, release of information, required reporting, risk management, quality improvement, corporate compliance, medical staff, and worker-related issues."441	HIM 313	Management for the Health Professions 	3	"Introduces students to six basic management functions (planning, organizing, staffing, directing, controlling and decision making) in the context of health care such as hospitals, long term care facilities and other health related organizations.  Concepts of management and management responsibilities (such as ethics, leadership and motivation) are related to selected functions.  Students lead case discussion groups or critique journal articles on each management function."442	HIM 392	Professional Practice Experience I - Technical	3	"The student will complete a three-week practicum in a hospital health information management services area.  Students will practice technical skills learned during the first year of the health information management curriculum.  (Note: Students who transfer from a health information technology program will transfer the equivalent of this course.)  Prerequisites:  HIM 100, HIM 305, HIM 306, and HIM 309, BIO 215T, BIO 215L, BIO 216T and BIO 216L; matriculated status in the SUNY Polytechnic Institute HIM program; and permission of the instructor."443	HIM 400	Non-Hospital Health Information Management Systems	2	"Non-hospital health care settings offer exciting employment alternatives for health information managers.  Included in this course will be a study of health information systems for psychiatric, developmental, occupational, long term, home health, correctional, emergency medical services, and veterinary care.  In addition, disease registries will be covered.  Prerequisites: HIM 392. Corequisite: HIM 494."444	HIM 401	Systems for the Evaluation and Improvement of Health Care Systems	3	"A study of the historical basis for current trends in the evaluation of health care, and an explanation of the role of the health care manager in this process.  Methods for assessing quality and appropriateness.  Use of the system as a risk management tool.  Two hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisites: HIM 100; STA 100."445	HIM 403	Introduction to Epidemiology	3	"Preventing the incidence of disease requires an understanding of the risk factors associated with its cause.  This course will provide a foundation for understanding the dynamics of health and disease in society, and impart a grasp of the fundamentals of epidemiology."446	HIM 425	Research in Health Information Management	3	A study of the application of research techniques to the health information management field.  Students will perform small research studies and will review published research in the field. Prerequisite: STA 100.447	HIM 435	Health Care Management/Medical Information Systems	3	"This course is intended to expose hospital managers to the areas where computers can assist in the direct care of the patient and the management of hospitals.  Emphasis will be placed on how to evaluate computers and information systems for hospitals, the unique problems involved in implementing computerized systems in the health care environment, and strategies for minimizing problems.  Prerequisite:  HIM 220. "448	HIM 440	Electronic Health Records	3	"Addresses the definition, benefits, standards, functionality and confidentiality/security measures for the electronic health record.  Case studies will be used to show how two health care organizations have developed their systems.  Prerequisites:  HIM 100, HIM 220, HIM 305, HIM 306."449	HIM 445	Healthcare Reimbursement	3	"Overview of payment systems for voluntary healthcare insurance plans, government-sponsored healthcare programs, managed care plans, hospital inpatients, ambulatory care patients, and post-acute care patients. Also includes revenue cycle management, the importance of clinical coding compliance, and value-based purchasing. Prerequisites: CSC 311C, HIM 305, HIM 306, HIM 400 and STA 100."450	HIM 450	Health Information Services Management	3	"Department management technique for health information management.  Applications of systems analysis, computer science, budgeting, personnel management, and plant layout for the health information manager.  Two hours lecture and two hours laboratory per week.  Prerequisites: HIM 400, MGT 318 and permission of HIM Program Coordinator."451	HIM 490	Selected Topics in Health Information Management	1 to 4	Courses offered as Selected Topics in Health Information Management supplement regularly offered courses.  Such courses enhance the student’s general knowledge of Health Information Management topics.452	HIM 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, education goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned.  Prerequisites:  Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."453	HIM 493	Senior Seminar	2	Final summary course with discussion of current events in the health information management field and preparation to enter the job market.  Includes a final comprehensive examination on the curriculum (a mock certification examination for the registered health information administrator).  Pre/Corequisite: HIM 450 and permission of HIM Program Coordinator.454	HIM 494	Professional Practice Experience II - Specialty	1	"Rotations through various non-hospital health information management service areas in facilities, such as those dealing with mental health, developmental disabilities, longterm care, hospice, home care, ambulatory care, disease registries, correctional health and occupational health.  Co-requisite:  HIM 400.  Prerequisite: Matriculated status in the SUNY Polytechnic Institute HIM program."455	 			456	HIM 495	Professional Practice Experience III – Management	3	Completion of a three-week experience in the health information management services area of a type of health–related organization of the student's choice.  Students will apply management skills learned in the health information management curriculum and they will complete at least one management-level project for the organization. Co-requisites: completion of or concurrent enrollment in HIM 450 and HIM 440. Prerequisite: Matriculated status in the SUNY Polytechnic Institute HIM program.457	History			458	HIS 101	American History: Colonies to Reconstruction	4	"A description and analysis of the major factors accounting for the transformation of the earliest settlements into a sovereign national power. Emphasis will be placed on the role of immigration, changing institutional values and structures, and the interplay between economic and political forces. Meets new General Education American History requirement."459	HIS 102	American History: Reconstruction to the Present	4	"A description and analysis of the principal forces involved in the growth of the U.S. from a society on the eve of massive industrialization into a technological consumer society. Features stressed will include the rise of the corporation, the development of an urban labor force, the changing role of government, and the integration of the United States into a global political and economic system. Meets new General Education American History requirement."460	HIS 150	History of Modern Europe	4	"A political and social survey of the period 1815present. Primary attention is given to the major Western European states and Russia. Central themes of the course include: the decline of aristocratic dominance and the attempts of first the middle, and then the lower classes, to gain control of society, the origins of World War I, the war itself and its aftermath, the rise of totalitarianism and the coming of World War II, the Cold War, new prosperity, and the global age. Meets new General Education Western Civilization or Humanities requirement."461	HIS 240	Latin American Civilizations	4	"A one-semester overview of Latin America, from the first encounters of European, African, and Native American cultures to the diverse and complex societies of the present.  Study of the region’s indigenous and colonial past will help explain contemporary politics, economics, social relations, and cultural movements.  Repercussions of the independence movements and subsequent democracies, monarchies, dictatorships and reform movements will be tracked.  Students will evaluate demographic changes, social upheaval and revolution, industrialization and development, environmental degradation, and foreign intervention.  Throughout the course, changes and continuities in race, class, gender, and other social roles will be identified and analyzed. Meets new General Education Other World Civilizations requirement."462	HIS 304	Technology in American History	4	"A lecture and reading and writing intensive course in American History organized around the theme of technology. History is the understanding of change over time. As such, this course focuses on technology as a central organizing theme to study changes that have happened in America. We will do so by exploring the interrelationships and interactions among technology and the changing political, economic, social, intellectual and cultural contexts in America. As a result, students can become thoughtful analysts of technology in context. Cross-listed with IDS 304."463	HIS 306	Science and Technology in World History	4	"An analysis of the histories of science and technology in the context of the broad outlines of world history and the history of western civilization.  As such, this course is an exploration of the interrelationships and interactions among technology, different forms of knowledge about nature, and their political, economic, social, intellectual, and cultural contexts.  That exploration will lay the foundation for a cross-cultural comparison of science and technology in the West and in other civilizations to analyze the significance of western science and technology’s dominance.  Lectures will supplement the text, and will cover themes and issues important to understand the changes that occurred in the histories of science and technology.  May not be taken for credit by students who previously took and passed HIS 307.  Meets new General Education Western Civilization and Other World Civilizations requirements, or can be used to meet Humanities requirement.  Cross-listed with IDS 306."464	HIS 308	Latinos in American History	4	"A review and analysis of the major historical developments explaining the presence of the United States' largest emergent minority group, the Hispanics, or Latinos.  Major themes include the colonial activities of the Spanish and Portuguese; subsequent historical developments involving Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, and other areas of Central and South America; the experience of Latinos in the U.S. in the past 200 years; and the current status and culture of Latino groups in American society. Meets new General Education American History requirement.  Only students scoring about 84 on the NYS Regents in American History."465	HIS 317	Topics in Black History	4	"Deals with a variety of periods in Black History which have contributed to American life as it exists today.  Topics will change each semester and may deal with such diverse matters as the African cultural roots of AfroAmerican life, views of Black family life and institutions during slavery.    Meets new General Education Western Civilization or Humanities requirement."466	HIS 330	American Women’s History:  U.S. Historical Experiences in Hemispheric Perspective	4	"An examination of the history of women in the United States from European colonization (ca. 1600) to the present, plus the opportunity to compare American women’s experiences with those of their peers throughout the Western Hemisphere.  Themes addressed will include:  race and ethnicity in colonization and coexistence, labor (paid and unpaid) and class issues, health and sexuality, religion and spirituality, and legal and political struggles. Meets new General Education American History requirement."467	HIS 360	Environmental History	4	"The constantly changing relationship between Americans and the land has been a continuing theme in American history, beginning with the ideas and attitudes the colonists brought with them from Europe and continuing to the current environmental movement and its opposition. This course deals with American attitudes toward land, natural resources, and nature from the roots of our ideas in Western civilization to the present.  This course will focus on Native American and European ideas about nature, explore the impact of the ideas of Thoreau, Muir, and Leopold, and analyze how science has changed our understanding of the relationship between Americans and nature. Meets new General Education Western Civilization requirement."468	HIS 370	Western Civilization and the World	4	"A historical analysis of Western and other world civilizations.  Explores the broad outlines of world history by comparing, contrasting, and relating the distinctive features of Western civilization to other world civilizations.  Topics covered include the origins and varieties of civilizations, the divergent traditions in world civilizations, European hegemony and the end of European dominance, and globalization.  This is a reading-intensive course in which lectures and discussions supplement the assigned reading. Meets new General Education Western Civilization and Other World Civilizations requirements."469	HIS 375 	Gender Issues in World History	4	"An examination of how gender roles have shaped the experiences of diverse men and women in a range of human societies worldwide, and how those roles have affected experiences of cultural interaction among societies in modern and recent history. Using historical monographs and primary sources, students will employ critical reading and writing skills to gain in-depth knowledge of these experiences and of trends in the field of gender history that can guide independent inquiry. Fulfills the SUNY General Education requirement in Western Civilizations and Other World Civilizations.  Cross-listed with IDS 375.  "470	HIS 390	Topics in History	4	"An in-depth examination of particular topics in history.  Topics might include World War II, the history of women in America, the Sixties and the Vietnam War, history of presidential elections.  Each course will use one or two general textbooks; in addition, every student will be required to perform research on a particular issue related to the topic of the course.  May be taken more than once as topics change.  "471	HIS 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member. The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, education, educational goals, methods of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned.  Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject matter."472	Humanities			473	HUM 110 	Humanities and the Postmodern World	4	"The twenty-first century world is being shaped by an array of technological, social, and economic forces ranging from the ubiquity of media and information technologies to the globalization of economic processes. The role of humanities in interpreting and understanding the reshaped landscape of this postmodern world is examined by exploring various modes of human expression (for example, art, architecture, film, literature, philosophy) and  studying how these try to make sense of this dynamic and sometimes disorientating social and cultural environment. "474	HUM 220	Introduction to Social and Political Thought	4	"An introduction to major ideas, themes and thinkers in social and political thought. While providing an overview of the western tradition, the course will also focus on recurring themes such as questions of power and authority, relations between the individual and the state, concepts of justice, equality, rights, and ideas of individualism, democracy, and community. Attention will be given to the development of ideas within their larger social, cultural and historical contexts. "475	Interdisciplinary Studies			476	IDS 102	Art and Culture	4	"A study of the ways that the arts represent major cultural changes focusing on non-western cultures.  Several art forms (literature, performing, or visual arts) will be studied as they mirror social history.  Emphasis falls on the appreciation and understanding of each art and its cultural context, with some comparison of the traditions of other-World and West.  Students may also engage in some hands-on experience with these art forms. Specific topics may vary.  A reading and writing intensive seminar course; meets the Other World Civilization SUNY General Education Requirement. "477	IDS 103	"Science, Technology, and Human Values"	4	"An exploration of the interrelationships between science and technology and their social and cultural contexts.  This course is a topics-based investigation that introduces students to a multi-disciplinary examination of a specific topic with the goal of developing an integrated, coherent, and well-rounded understanding of both that topic and the value of interdisciplinary inquiry.  Possible topics include health and illness, food, transportation, energy, information, and other subjects.  A reading and writing intensive seminar class; meets the Humanities SUNY General Education Requirement. "478	IDS 201	Perspectives on Knowledge	4	"A critical and comparative analysis of different ways of knowing focusing on the western tradition with some cross-cultural comparisons.  Begins by analyzing different ways humans have sought to know the truth, and by comparing and contrasting formal, universal ways of knowing with practical, experience-based, problem-oriented ways of knowing.  The resulting understanding of knowledge provides the foundation for students to develop their own perspectives on knowledge.  A reading and writing intensive seminar class; meets the Western Civilization SUNY General Education Requirement."479	IDS 203	"Introduction to Science, Technology, and Society"	4	"Explores the humanistic and social dimensions of science and technology by looking at the interactions and interrelationships among science, technology, and society.  We will explore: 1) the practice of science and technology to understand how scientific and technological work are conducted as creative and human enterprises; 2) how science and technology are shaped by different social and economic forces; 3) the impact of science and technology on society; 4) ethical issues related to science and technology."480	IDS 204	Understanding Human Nature	4	"Examines human nature from a wide variety of disciplinary perspectives including philosophy, religion, psychology, sociology, biology, and literature.  It also includes an examination of the implications of the relationships between humans and technology for our understanding of human nature.  Meets the General Education Humanities requirement."481	IDS 220	Creativity and Culture	4	"An introduction to the concepts and practices of creative activity in contemporary society. The course will explore both ideas and processes of creativity across multiple contexts, domains, and genres (e.g. fine arts, folk and popular arts, craft, design) with a focus on understanding the cultural contexts and processes of creativity. Students will engage in hands-on creative activities in different genres as well as reflect upon the aesthetic and practical dimensions of these experiences in order to appreciate and critically engage the goals, purposes, and processes of creative activities. Meets The Arts SUNY General Education Requirement. "482	IDS 301	"Monsters, Robots, Cyborgs"	4	"What is the significance of the troubling figures – the monsters, robots, and cyborgs – that haunt our collective imagination? In this course students will examine the monstrous figures and technological bodies that populate the cultural landscape, interpreting them within their social, historical, cultural, political, and intellectual contexts. Approached in this manner, we will explore how these figures reveal our anxieties about the world—anxieties about the social, political, moral, and technological orders that organize our world—and how we fit (and do not fit) within these structures and systems. Meets the General Education Humanities requirement."483	IDS 302	Postmodernism and Popular Culture	4	"Begins with a foundational overview of major theories of Postmodernism from interdisciplinary perspectives (e.g. philosophy, sociology, psychology, history, anthropology, literary studies, political science).  Students will then read, discuss and apply knowledge from more specialized scholarship that discusses some popular cultural practices and artifacts.  Assignments include readings, discussion, quizzes, formal and informal writing, presentations, and a midterm and/or final exam.  Topics may include: film, television, celebrity, technology, social networking, and self-publishing (blogs, wikis, etc.).  Fulfills the General Education Humanities requirement. "484	IDS 303	The Body in Western Thought and Culture	4	"An examination of how the human body is conceptualized and represented in western thought and culture. Whereas the role of mind and intellect holds the privileged position in the western tradition, the human body, in its corporeality, materiality and mortality is the source of vexing problems. Yet it is impossible to understand either human existence or human experience without addressing our existence as embodied beings. This course will explore how the body and its problems are thought, addressed, and represented in western thought and culture. Topics may include the mind/body dualism, society and the body, and intersections of sex, gender, class, and race as they converge over the body. "485	IDS 304	Technology in American History	4	"A lecture and reading and writing intensive course in American History organized around the theme of technology. History is the understanding of change over time. As such, this course focuses on technology as a central organizing theme to study changes that have happened in America. We will do so by exploring the interrelationships and interactions among technology and the changing political, economic, social, intellectual and cultural contexts in America. As a result, students can become thoughtful analysts of technology in context. Cross-listed with HIS 304."486	IDS 306	Science and Technology in World History	4	"An analysis of the histories of science and technology in the context of the broad outlines of world history and the history of western civilization.  As such, this course is an exploration of the interrelationships and interactions among technology, different forms of knowledge about nature, and their political, economic, social, intellectual, and cultural contexts.  That exploration will lay the foundation for a cross-cultural comparison of science and technology in the West and in other civilizations to analyze the significance of western science and technology’s dominance.  Lectures will supplement the text, and will cover themes and issues important to understand the changes that occurred in the histories of science and technology.  May not be taken for credit by students who previously took and passed HIS 307.  Meets new General Education Western Civilization and Other World Civilizations requirements, or can be used to meet Humanities requirement.  Cross-listed with HIS 306."487	IDS 311	Humor and Comedy in Society	4	"Beyond being funny, the ways we generate, receive and consume comedy affects the way we view and participate in the world around us. Comedy helps us function in the world, and it shapes the way we perceive things on personal, political and social levels. Laughing at others and ourselves allows us to gain and withhold power, and as such a study of comedy is valuable to understanding aspects of the genre such as aggression, compliance, and transgression. IDS 311 offers a study of comedy from a variety of perspectives (e.g. philosophy, sociology, psychology, history, anthropology, literary studies, political science, and linguistics). Artifacts of study may include film, television, written texts, and radio. Topics of study may include gender and sexuality, ethnicity, political satire, and religious humor. Meets the General Education Humanities requirement. For IDS majors, this course partially fulfills the Cultural Analysis and Interpretation Area of Inquiry."488	IDS 375	Gender Issues in World History	4	"An examination of how gender roles have shaped the experiences of diverse men and women in a range of human societies worldwide, and how those roles have affected experiences of cultural interaction among societies in modern and recent history. Using historical monographs and primary sources, students will employ critical reading and writing skills to gain in-depth knowledge of these experiences and of trends in the field of gender history that can guide independent inquiry. Fulfills the SUNY General Education requirement in Other World Civilizations.  Cross-listed with HIS 375.  "489	IDS 380	Critical Perspectives on Digital Society	4	"Exposes students to a range of critical/cultural theories and approaches to the study of new media, including those allied to medium theory, cultural studies, political economy of communication, ideological inquiry, globalization and commercialism. Students will explore multiple theorists/theoretical positions in depth. Cross-listed with COM 380."490	IDS 390	Selected Topics in Interdisciplinary Studies	4	A selected topic explored in depth from an interdisciplinary perspective.  Students may receive credit for taking the course more than once provided the course has a different topic. 491	IDS 400	Prominent Themes in Western Civilization Since the Renaissance	4	"A reading and writing intensive course that examines the central themes, issues, and ideas in western civilization in the modern and postmodern eras in an interdisciplinary fashion.  It incorporates knowledge from a variety of intellectual fields, including physics, biology, social science, philosophy, political science, and literature.  In this course, students will read primarily original sources as well as some secondary sources.  Meets the General Education Western Civilization requirement."492	IDS 401	Contemporary Worldviews	4	"A reading and writing intensive course that studies a dominant characteristic of Western thought in the twentieth century through interdisciplinary readings.  Students will read primary sources in history, philosophy, science, literature, the visual arts, or social sciences, and will study and compare the nature of the core idea in each discipline.  Possible issues to be examined include the crisis of authority, the ecological consciousness, technology and culture.  Meets the General Education Western Civilization requirement."493	IDS 410	Research and Critical Methods	4	"Introduction to various modes of analyzing subjects in the humanities and social sciences.  Students will gain an understanding of the techniques, methodologies, and vocabularies of research methods and will become familiar with debates regarding those research methods.  Students will employ several research methods to assess their preferences for approaches to subject matter, and will design and carry out an interdisciplinary final project.  Topics of study include:  critical theory, film and visual arts criticism, historiography, literary criticism, and social science research issues."494	IDS 435	Art and Technology	4	"A study of the interaction between technological change and artistic expression.  Early historical examples will be used to establish fundamental principles of art and technology as sources of cultural value.  The course will emphasize twentieth century developments in imaging, including film and digital art.  Students will produce their own examples of traditional and electronically mediated art. "495	IDS 492	Interdisciplinary Studies Internship	2 to 4	Intended for Interdisciplinary Studies majors to gain practical and/or professional experience in an area related to their individual program of study.  Student will work with a qualified specialist in the relevant area and will be responsible for reporting to both that specialist and to a faculty supervisor.  Students wishing to enroll must have filed their program of study and completed a minimum of 12 credits in their chosen area of concentration. 496	IDS 499	Interdisciplinary Studies Project	4	"A capstone seminar in which students design and complete an individual project demonstrating their mastery and integration of their individual Area of Concentration and the Interdisciplinary Studies core.  Projects may take a range of forms appropriate to the student’s concentration and future goals, e.g. a research essay, marketing study, computer program or curriculum design.  Projects must be approved by the student’s project supervisors.  Students will participate in a seminar addressing research issues and will present their projects to their faculty supervisors at the end of the course. "497	Idea to Startup 			498	ITS 303	What’s the Big Idea	3	"Student will be introduced to how to develop an idea into an entrepreneurial vision. This will include conceptualizing and presenting an idea to potential team members and investors, focusing your idea, understanding competition and looking for missing opportunities in a market, learn how to form a team and financial planning to support your idea. This course and BUS 303 cannot both be taken for credit."499	ITS 304	Idea to Startup	3	"Students will develop an action plan for their business. This will include developing a plan to get your product to market, develop a proof of concept or demo, develop a business plan, which can be used to pitch your idea to investors, and refine the team which will help you get your idea to market. The culmination of the final project is a presentation to investors. This course and BUS 304 cannot both be taken for credit."500	Japanese			501	JPN 101	Elementary Japanese	4	"Elementary Japanese is designed for students with little or no background knowledge of the Japanese language and culture. Will provide students with basic language and cultural knowledge, strategies and skills to help them interact in real and social situations they are most likely to encounter in Japan. Students will learn basic Japanese language structures that will serve as a base for further Japanese language acquisition. Meets SUNY General Education Foreign Language requirement. "502	JPN 102	Intermediate Japanese	4	"This course continues the basic grammar of JAP 101 to develop proficiency in Japanese.  It refines the language acquisition skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing.  Students will learn to read and write with combinations of hiragana, katakana, and kanji.  The course integrates aspects of Japanese culture to broaden understanding of the language. "503	Management			504	MGT 307	Organization Behavior	4	"Managerial practices will be studied using a strong emphasis on the importance of individuals’ behaviors influencing the effectiveness of organizational performance.  The course combines a review of organizational behavior, based upon theory and research in the social sciences, and a variety of individual and small group activities intended to aid students in applying theory to the management of varied organizations.  Subject matter includes key topics such as organization-structures, motivation, perception, conflict, communication, leadership, decision making, cultural diversity, and multinational perspectives for managers."505	MGT 318	Human Resources Management	4	Current managerial thought recognizes the importance of human resource contributions to organizational effectiveness and goal achievement.  A key aspect of this course is the focus on stateoftheart systems which support basic business objectives as well as foster good working relations between employees and managers.  Topics include: human resource planning; legislative and legal requirements; staffing; performance evaluation; employee relations; and compensation.  Personal computer projects are included.  506	MGT 320	"Appraisal, Compensation & Motivation"	4	"The use of compensation as a motivator is a complex issue, but of paramount importance in all organizations.  Key topics include motivation theory, performance appraisal, government regulation and internal and external pay equity.  Students design a pay system for a hypothetical company.  Prerequisite:  MGT 318.  Cross listed with HRM 620."507	MGT 415	Industrial and Labor Relations	4	"Managerial success in many human resource-oriented work environments demand competency in the labor relations area.  Labor relations extends beyond the traditional boundaries of contracts and grievances.  This course provides the necessary background to enable the student to appreciate how the labor relations environment has developed; to function both formally and informally within that environment; and to understand economic, cultural and legal factors which may affect that environment in the future.  Prerequisite: MGT 318 or permission of instructor."508	MGT 425	Human Resource Selection & Staffing	4	"A systematic framework for understanding the process of recruitment, selection, and retention in organizations.  This framework begins with planning, job analysis, and the analysis of external factors such as the legal environment.  Presents recruitment sources, selection methods (e.g., structured interviews, written testing, work performance samples, validation), and staffing decision making criteria, and concludes with the issue of retention (how to keep the good employees hired).  Topics include job analysis, recruitment, internal selection, external selection, testing, checking references, legal compliance, decision making, final match, and retention of employees.  Prerequisite:  MGT 318."509	MGT 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."510	MGT 492	Management Internship	4	"Supervised, discipline related experience in a business organization.  Emphasis is on application, process, and techniques used by business to sustain business and promote growth.  Specific skills and competencies needed to be a successful decision-maker will be targeted.  Oversight will be provided by the School internship coordinator and the sponsoring organization.  Periodic meetings with the supervisor, mid-semester evaluation, and a final, comprehensive written report are required.  Prerequisite:  Permission of instructor."511	Management Information Systems			512	MIS 315	Introduction to Management Information Systems	4	"The wide availability of powerful and affordable information technologies today has made it imperative for managers and entrepreneurs to not only appreciate the role that they play in achieving organizational goals but also develop skills to deploy them for both personal and organizational competitive advantage.  This course introduces students to information technologies, the common systems built using such technologies, the major organizational processes that such systems sustain, and the development and management of systems in organizations.  Topics covered include the role of business intelligence, e-commerce, hardware, software, databases, and telecommunications; information systems development and management."513	Management Science			514	MGS 411	Introduction to Management Science	4	"A broad range of quantitative techniques and their applications in business are included in this course.  Microcomputers and/or calculators are used extensively.  The topics covered will be: costvolumeprofit analysis, linear programminggraphical and simplex methods, transportation method, probability concepts and applications, decision theory, inventory and production models, and game theory.  Prerequisites: MAT 112, STA 100."515	Marketing			516	MKT 301	Marketing Management Principles	4	"Topics covered include: marketing's role in society and the firm, the marketing concept, product planning, consumer behavior, marketing research, channels of distribution, retailing, wholesaling, pricing, promotion, and planning and evaluating marketing strategy.  Group discussions, case studies, and spreadsheet software are utilized."517	MKT 312	Marketing Management Problems	4	"Analysis of problems encountered by firms in marketing goods and services.  Emphasis is placed on the formation of strategies to integrate product planning, pricing, distribution, promotion, and service within the existing legal framework.  Prerequisite: MKT 301 or equivalent."518	MKT 321	Advertising Management	4	"Issues in the development and management of creative strategies to accomplish marketing objectives in a competitive economy.  Includes the role, scope, and organization of advertising, the use of agencies, media investigations and campaigns, personal selling, and legal, regulatory, and ethical constraints.  Prerequisite: MKT 301 or equivalent."519	MKT 378	Marketing for Entrepreneurs	4	"Focuses on marketing activities required by entrepreneurial ventures, including small businesses, franchises, new ventures, non-profits activities, and internal corporate projects.  Emphasis is placed on effectively and creatively marketing the innovative venture.  This course focuses on the theoretical and practical aspects of marketing entrepreneurial ideas in written and oral form supported by numerical and qualitative arguments.  Prerequisite: ENT 375."520	MKT 465	Consumer Behavior	4	"Behavior science theories are examined for practical application in developing marketing strategies: motivation theory, consumer perception, attitude theory, and social referents.  Case studies, class discussion, and projects are used to examine consumer behavior.  Prerequisites: MKT 301 or equivalent."521	MKT 470	Marketing Research	4	"Through the use of cases, exercises, and projects, the course reviews the application of research methods to gather marketing information.  Applied marketing research studies are examined in steps: plan, design, execution, and interpretation.  Prerequisites: MKT 301 and STA 100 or equivalents."522	MKT 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."523	MKT 492	Marketing Internship	4	"Supervised, discipline related experience in a business organization.  Emphasis is on application, process, and techniques used by business to sustain business and promote growth.  Specific skills and competencies needed to be a successful decision-maker will be targeted.  Oversight will be provided by the School internship coordinator and the sponsoring organization.  Periodic meetings with the supervisor, mid-semester evaluation, and a final, comprehensive written report are required.  Prerequisite:  Permission of instructor."524	Mathematics			525	MAT 090	Preparation for College Mathematics	0	"A mathematics skills course designed for the student who needs to develop basic arithmetic, geometry and pre-algebra skills.  Only S/U grades are assigned for this course."526	MAT 110	College Algebra	4	"Techniques of algebra manipulation needed for success in the Calculus courses will be introduced and developed.  Topics will include:  sets, polynomials, factoring, rational expressions, exponents, radicals, coordinate geometry, inequalities, simultaneous equations, quadratic equations, and partial fractions.  Applications with word problems will be included."527	MAT 111	College Mathematics	4	"The course provides a basic background in critical thinking and problem solving through the language and methods of mathematics.  Topics include a review and extension of algebra, geometry, quantitative reasoning and data analysis.  An emphasis is placed upon logic and reasoning in a mathematical context.  Students who have previously completed MAT 112 or higher may not enroll in this course for degree credit.  Prerequisite:  High school algebra and geometry.  A terminal college course in mathematics for students who will not take other mathematics courses (such as Precalculus, Elements of Calculus, etc.).  Meets new General Education Mathematics requirement."528	MAT 112	Elements of Calculus	4	"This is a terminal introductory course in calculus suitable for business, computer science, and telecommunications majors.  Topics in both the differential and the integral calculus are covered.  These include: functions and graphs, the derivative, differentiation rules, optimization problems, rates of change, exponential and logarithmic functions, the antiderivative, the definite integral, and integration by substitution and by parts.  Applications will be drawn from diverse areas such as business, economics, and the life sciences.  Students who have previously completed MAT 121 or higher may not enroll in this course for degree credit.  Prerequisite: MAT 110 College Algebra or equivalent.  Meets new General Education Mathematics requirement."529	MAT 115	Finite Mathematics	4	"A rigorous introduction to discrete mathematics as it is used in computer science.  Topics include functions, relations, sets, propositional and predicate logic, simple circuit logic, proof techniques, elementary combinatorics, and discrete probability. Meets new General Education Mathematics requirement."530	MAT 120	Precalculus	4	"Introduces the student to some of the fundamental concepts needed to be able to study calculus.  Topics include: algebra review, functions, graphing, exponential, logarithmic, and circular functions, trigonometry, complex numbers, and vectors.  Students who have previously completed MAT 121 or higher may not enroll in this course for degree credit.  Prerequisite: MAT 111 or equivalent. Meets new General Education Mathematics requirement."531	MAT 121	Calculus for Engineering Technology I	4	"Introduces the student to the differential calculus.  Topics include: analytic geometry in a plane,  functions, limits, the derivative and differentiation rules, partial derivatives, related rates, extrema, curve sketching, mean value theorem, linear approximations and parametric equations.    Prerequisite: MAT 120 or equivalent.  Meets new General Education Mathematics requirement."532	MAT 122	Calculus for Engineering Technology II	4	"Introduces the student to the integral calculus.  Topics include: the indefinite and definite integrals, areas, volumes, work, the exponential, logarithmic, inverse trigonometric, and hyperbolic functions, integration techniques, improper integrals, L'Hopital's rule, Taylor polynomials and polar coordinates. Prerequisite: MAT 121 or equivalent."533	MAT 151	Calculus I	4	"More advanced than MAT 121, this course is required for mathematics and engineering majors, and is recommended for mathematics minors.  Covers the concept of the derivative and begins the study of integration.  Topics include:  functions, limits, continuity, the derivative, differentiation rules, mean value theorem, related rates, extrema, curve sketching, Newton’s method, linear approximations, definite and indefinite integrals, the fundamental theorem of calculus and parametric equations.  Meets new General Education Mathematics requirement.  Prerequisite:  MAT 120 or equivalent with a grade C or better, or permission of instructor.  MAT 121 and MAT 151 cannot both be taken for credit. "534	MAT 152	Calculus II	4	"More advanced than MAT 122, this course is required for mathematics and engineering majors, and is recommended for mathematics minors.  Continues the study of integration and also includes infinite series.  Topics include:  integration techniques, transcendental functions, applications of integration, conic sections, L’Hopital’s rule, improper integrals, sequences and series, and polar co-ordinates.  Meets new General Education Mathematics requirement.  Prerequisite:  MAT 151 with a grade C or better or equivalent or MAT 121 with permission of instructor.  MAT 152 and MAT 122 cannot both be taken for credit. "535	MAT 225	Applied Statistical Analysis	4	"Deals in depth with statistical methods used to analyze data.  Applications are drawn from many diverse areas.  Topics  include: measures of location and scale for frequency distributions,  addition and multiplication laws for probability, the binomial, Poisson, and normal distributions, inferences about proportions and  location parameters in onesample and twosample problems, analysis of completely randomized and randomized blocks designs, simple linear regression and correlation, sign test, median test, rank sum test,  and signed rank test.  Prerequisites:  MAT 112, MAT 122 or MAT 152."536	MAT 230	Differential Equations	4	"An introduction to the theory of ordinary differential equations and matrices.  The emphasis is on the development of methods important in engineering and the physical sciences.  Topics include: theory and applications of first order and second order differential equations, Laplace transform method, matrix algebra, determinants, Cramer's rule, eigenvalues, and systems of linear differential equations. Applied Mathematics majors must take MAT 260 and can’t receive credit for this course. Prerequisite: MAT 122 or equivalent."537	MAT 253	Calculus III	4	"Many properties of systems studied in applied science are functions of several variables or vector valued functions.  This course develops the calculus of such functions.  Topics include: vectors and vector valued functions, analytic geometry in space, functions of several variables, partial differentiation, the gradient, maxima and minima, Lagrange multipliers, and multiple integrals, line and surface integrals, Stokes and Divergence theorems.  Prerequisite: MAT 122 or equivalent."538	MAT 260	Ordinary Differential Equations and Series Solutions	4	"The course will allow students to become familiar with the subject of differential equations. It covers methods of solutions such as: separation of variables, integrating factor, reduction of order. Differential equations with constant and variable (Cauchy-Euler) coefficients are treated as well as series solutions of differential equations are introduced (method of Frobenius, Bessel and Legendre equations). Laplace transform and system of Linear first order equations are covered. Examples of applications of differential equations in physics, engineering are given. Prerequisite: MAT 152 with a grade C or better, or permission of instructor. "539	MAT 290	Topics in Mathematics	1 to 4	An introductory course in selected topics in Mathematics not currently covered in any of the listed classes. Topics are chosen to illustrate different fields and applications which are all part of mathematics. 540	MAT 335	Mathematical Modeling	4	"Designed to teach the student some of the skills necessary to construct and critique mathematical models of physical and industrial processes.  The student will apply skills acquired in MAT 230 to the models presented.  Topics include: applications of first and second order ordinary differential equations, systems of nonlinear ordinary differential equations, stability, phase plane analysis, optimization, conservation laws and finite differences.  Prerequisite: MAT 230 and familiarity with a computer language, or permission of instructor."541	MAT 340	Linear Algebra	4	"Many systems studied in science, engineering, and computer science involve a linear relationship among many variables.  Linear algebra is the mathematical description of such problems.  Topics include: systems of linear equations, Gaussian elimination, matrices, determinants, Cramer's rule, vector spaces, linear transformations, eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Prerequisite:  MAT 121 or permission of instructor."542	MAT 345	Introduction to Graph Theory	4	"Provides students with an introduction to graphs and their properties.  Topics include graphs and digraphs, eulerian and hamiltonian graphs, connectivity, planarity, shortest path problems, trees, and coloring.  Attention will be paid to theorems and their proofs.  Applications will be given throughout the course.  Prerequisite:  MAT 122 or MAT 413."543	MAT 370	Applied Probability	4	"An introduction to the theory of probability and its applications.  Topics include: basic set theory, elementary probability, counting arguments, conditional probability and independence, random variables and their properties, functions of random variables, distribution functions, probability models and applications such as stochastic processes.  Prerequisite: MAT 122."544	MAT 380	Abstract Mathematics:  An Introduction	4	"An introduction to rigorous mathematics.  Students will be exposed to the building blocks of mathematical theory – axioms, definitions, theorems, and proofs.  The emphasis will be on constructing proofs and writing clear mathematics.  The language and methods of mathematics will be explored while introducing students to the basics of set theory, number theory, topology on the real line, and functions.  Prerequisite:  MAT 122."545	MAT 381	Modern Algebra	4	"An introductory course in Abstract/Modern Algebra.  Topics will include elementary theory of groups, rings and fields:  Groups, Subgroups, Quotient Groups, Symmetry, Rings, Fields, and Extension Fields.  We will explore connections between Modern Algebra, Number Theory and Linear Algebra.  SUNY Polytechnic Institute mathematics course at 200 level or higher excluding MAT 225 or, permission of the instructor."546	MAT 401	Series and Boundary Value Problems	4	"Introduces advanced mathematical methods used to solve certain problems in engineering and the physical sciences.  Topics include: sequences and series, Fourier series and transforms, series solutions of ordinary differential equations, partial differential equations, and solution of some boundary value problems.  Prerequisite: MAT 230 or equivalent."547	MAT 413	Discrete Mathematics for Computer Science	4	"Background to understanding computer science as the science of clear and concise descriptions of computable, discrete sets.  Provides conceptual tools useful for any advanced study in computer science.  Topics include: review of set theory, logic and relational calculus, algebraic structures (lattices, Boolean algebra, semigroups, groups, rings, etc.) and morphisms and their application in computer science (automata theory, coding, switching theory, etc.), formal languages and their acceptors, and elements of information theory and of the theory of computability.  "548	MAT 420	Complex Variables and their Applications	4	"An introductory study of functions involving complex numbers.  Subjects are selected based upon their importance in physical and engineering applications.  Included are complex numbers, complex functions, analytic functions, complex integration, infinite series, residue theorem, contour integration, conformal mapping and application of harmonic functions.  Prerequisite: MAT 122 or equivalent."549	MAT 425	Real Analysis	4	"Introduces the student to a rigorous development of the real number system and the theory of Calculus on the real number line.  Topics include: basic set theory, the real number system, sequences and series, limits and continuity, the derivative, the Riemann Integral, the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, and sequences and series of functions.  Prerequisite: MAT 381."550	MAT 430	Number Theory and Its Applications	4	"Introductory course in Number Theory that will introduce students to the basic concepts as well as some modern applications.  Topics include:  prime numbers, Greatest Common Divisors, The Euclidean Algorithm, congruences, Fermat’s Little Theorem, primality testing, etc.  Applications of Number Theory:  cryptography, pseudorandom numbers, etc.  Prerequisite:  MAT 380 or MAT 381 or MAT 413 or permission of the instructor.  Cross listed with 530."551	MAT 450	Partial Differential Equations	4	"A study of Partial Differential Equations, or Pde’s, and their applications in science and engineering. The basic development of physical models leading to partial differential equations is discussed.  Solution methods and basic theory are presented.  Topics include: first order Pde’s, method of characteristics, the canonical second order Pde’s, separation of variables, Hilbert space methods, finite difference methods.  Prerequisites: MAT 260 and MAT 253."552	MAT 460	Numerical Differential Equations	4	"Fundamental mathematical methods associated with the numerical solution of ordinary and partial differential equations are investigated.  Algorithms emphasizing both standard and newly developed methodologies are developed in the context of theoretical and practical considerations.  Mathematical questions such as convergence, accuracy, and appropriateness of method are developed in a systematic manner.  A variety of mathematical models and problems of current interest are used to emphasize many of the core results.  Students will learn to develop their own algorithms and to use algorithms from existing high quality numerical libraries.  Many of the models studied in this course will come from both standard mathematical models and topics related to current faculty research interests.  Topics include: Runge-Kutta methods, finite difference techniques, finite element techniques, approximation methods, error estimation, and accuracy.  Prerequisites: MAT 253,  MAT 260 and familiarity with a programming language."553	MAT 490	Selected Topics in Mathematics	1 to 4	An in-depth treatment of a selected topic not normally treated extensively in other mathematics courses.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.554	MAT 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area. "555	MAT 492	Applied Mathematics Internship	4	"The internship is available to qualified Applied Mathematics majors.  It is designed to provide students with an opportunity to integrate academic and practical experience in an industrial setting in a field related to mathematics.  Before the internship is approved, the student, the employer, and a Mathematics faculty member develop a contract concerning the nature of the internship.  Weekly reports and a final presentation are required for the internship.  Prerequisites:  3.0 or better GPA in major and approval of Applied Mathematics faculty."556	Mechanical Engineering			557	ME 220	Kinematics and Mechanisms	3	"Synthesis and analysis of mechanisms using analytical and graphical methods, covering the synthesis of linkages and other mechanisms, and the analysis of position, velocity, acceleration and force of mechanisms.  Introduces the principles behind the operation of various machine elements and their associated design and analysis techniques.  Three hours of lecture per week.  Prerequisites:  ESC 120 and ESC 210.  "558	ME 310	Design and Manufacturability	3	"Development of the detailed process knowledge for key manufacturing processes including: manual and machine assembly, machining, injection molding, thermoforming, and casting.  Topics discussed include the required tools, machines, process physics, and materials behavior associated with each of the manufacturing processes leading to the final product.  Prerequisites: ESC 120, ESC 220 and ESC 230.  "559	ME 320 	Fluid Mechanics	3	"An introduction to the fundamentals of fluid mechanics, including: physical properties of fluids, hydrostatics, conservation laws with both control volume analysis and differential analysis, Bernoulli’s equation, potential flows, simple viscous flows (solved with Navier-Stokes equations), dimensional analysis, conduit flow, boundary layers and an introduction to compressible flow.   Prerequisites: MAT 253, ESC 240, and ME 330."560	ME 330	Engineering Thermodynamics I 	3	"Basic thermodynamics concepts, properties of pure substances, first and second law analysis of systems and control volumes, exergy analysis, and introduction to vapor power systems. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisites: CHE 130T and CHE 130L, ESC 220 and MAT 260."561	ME 340	Engineering Thermodynamics II	3	"Analysis and modeling of propulsion and power systems, including combustion, compressible flow nozzles, chemical equilibrium, moist air systems, PV devices and fuel cells. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisite: ME 330"562	ME 390	Machine Design	3	"Design and analysis of standard mechanical components for static and fluctuating loads.  Specification of components such as shafts, bearings, and power transformers.  Three hours of lecture per week.  Prerequisite: ESC 240, ME 220, and ME 310."563	ME 410	Heat Transfer	3	"An introduction to heat and mass transfer phenomena commonly found in the practice of engineering.  The study of the fundamental heat transfer mechanisms of conduction, convection, radiation exchange, and mass transfer.  The mathematics of heat transfers in single and two dimensions and under steady and transient flows are discussed and applied using a wide set of problems.  Applications of the principles of heat transfer to heat exchangers and pipe flows are presented.  An introduction to mass transfer and diffusion is included.  Three hours of lecture per week.  Prerequisites: ME 320 and ME 330."564	ME 420	 Thermal Sciences Laboratory	2	"Reinforcement and enhancement of the student’s understanding of the fundamentals of fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, and heat transfer learned in ME 320, 330 and 380 respectively.  Experiments conducted are designed to demonstrate the applications of the basic fluid and thermal science principles and to provide a more intuitive and physical understanding of these disciplines.  The work is accomplished in groups; individual written reports and oral presentations are required.  Prerequisites: ME 320, ME 330 and ME 380."565	ME 422	"Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning"	3	"The analysis and design of heating air conditioning systems. Topics include: psychometrics, comfort & health, heating and cooling loads, solar radiation, air distribution systems and refrigeration. Three hours of lecture per week. Prerequisite: ME 410."566	ME 424	Computational Fluid Dynamics	3	"An introduction to computational fluid dynamics (CFD) which provides a basic understanding of how CFD problems are set and which factors affect the success and failure of a CFD analysis.  Included topics are: the mathematical and physical fundamentals of CFD, formulation of CFD problems, basic principles of numerical approximation (including: grids, consistency, convergence, stability, and order of approximation) methods of discretization with focus on finite difference and finite volume techniques, methods of solution of transient and steady-state fluid mechanics and heat transfer problems, commonly used numerical methods for heat transfer and fluid flows, plus a brief introduction into turbulence modeling.  Prerequisites: ME 320, MAT 450 and MAT 460."567	ME 425	Sustainable Energy: Choosing Among Options	3	"The technical, economic, environmental and physical resources constraints of energy sources are discussed in terms of both national and global development needs. The current states of both non-renewable and renewable technologies are presented in terms of their potential contribution to sustainable energy resources required for continued viable economic development. Prerequisite: ME 330, or senior standing or permission of instructor."568	ME 430 	Introduction to Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos	3	"An introduction to the theory and phenomenology of nonlinear dynamics and chaos in dissipative systems. The content is structured to be of general interest to undergraduates in engineering, science and mathematics. The course concentrates on simple models of dynamical systems, their relevance to natural phenomena and methods of data analysis and interpretation. The emphasis is on nonlinear phenomena which may be described by a few variables that evolve with time. Prerequisites: PHY 201T, PHY 201L, and MAT 253."569	ME 440	 Analytical Dynamics	3	"Advanced analytical methods of classical dynamics are taught, and connections are made between classical and modern mechanics. The emphasis is placed on using the methods of Lagrangian and Hamiltonian mechanics to model and analyze dynamic systems. Prerequisite: ESC 240 and MAT 340."570	ME 446	Modeling and Control of Dynamic Systems	3	"Design and analysis of feedback control for mechanical and electro-mechanical dynamic systems.  Topics include system modeling, transfer function, Laplace transform, block diagram and signal-flow graph, control system characteristics and performance, stability analysis, root locus method, Bode diagram, state-space equations, linearization, and feedback control schemes.  Three hours of lecture per week.  Prerequisite: ESC 240 and MAT 340. "571	ME 449	Finite Element Analysis	3	"Modern analysis techniques used to investigate a variety of systems in engineering and science.  Computational models of problems are developed using energy concepts, structural mechanics, and matrix operations.  The methods used are implemented using a general finite element program and the accuracy of the results is evaluated.  The learned theoretical approach is applied to common structural elements such as trusses, beams, frames, and plates.  Prerequisites: ESC 230, MAT 260, and MAT 253."572	ME 450	Microelectromechanical Systems	3	"Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) covers fundamental topics including:  materials properties, fabrication techniques, basic structure mechanics, sensing and actuation, circuit and system, packaging, calibration and testing.  Explores applications such as: micro-sensors and actuators, micromanipulation, microfluid systems and biomedical systems.  Three hours of lecture per week.  Prerequisites: ESC 220, ECE 260, MAT 260."573	ME 460	Modeling of Metal Cutting Processes	3	"Using state-of-the-art analysis techniques, common metal cutting processes such as turning, milling and drilling are studied. Modeling, stability and machined surface accuracy are discussed. Topics covered include cutting force models, regenerative chatter and predictive models for chatter-free processes. Prerequisites: ESC 240, ME 310"574	ME 471	Introduction to Mobile Robotics	3	"The fundamentals of mobile robotics are taught. The emphasis is placed on robot mobility which allows a mobile robot to move through an environment to perform its tasks, covering the aspects of locomotion, sensing, localization and motion planning. Also covered are computer modeling and programming of mobile robots. Prerequisite: ESC 120, ESC 240, and MAT 340."575	ME 472	Fundamental Principles of Robot Manipulators	3	"The fundamental principles of robot manipulators are taught, including the kinematics, dynamics, trajectory generation and control. Also covered are computer modeling and analysis of robot manipulators, and programming of robot manipulators. Prerequisite: ESC 120, ESC 240 and MAT 340."576	ME 480	Capstone Design I	3	"This is the first course of a two-semester sequence (fall and spring) for seniors intended as a “capstone” design project where students have the opportunity to utilize the broad range of their undergraduate experience in a realistic team design project.  Projects are selected to provide interaction with industry sponsor(s) and cross-fertilization of ideas and to simulate anticipated future professional experience for the team members.  Written specifications, literature review, planning, and completion of the selected project are required for graduation.  The product of each project is a comprehensive report or design proposal having both global and detail completeness. The project may involve development of cost information necessary to effect construction and may involve construction and commissioning of the designed apparatus.  Six hours of class time per week is scheduled to accommodate: lectures, team working sessions, team meeting times and oral presentations.  Prerequisites:  Senior standing or permission of the Mechanical Engineering advisor."577	ME 482	Capstone Design II	3	"This is the second course of a two-semester sequence (fall and spring) for seniors intended as a “capstone” design project where students have the opportunity to utilize the broad range of their undergraduate experience in a realistic team design project.  Projects are selected to provide interaction with industry sponsor(s) and cross-fertilization of ideas and to simulate anticipated future professional experience for the team members.  Written specifications, literature review, planning, and completion of the selected project are required for graduation.  The product of each project is a comprehensive report of design proposal having both global and detail completeness. The project may involve development of cost information necessary to effect construction and may actually involve construction and commissioning of the designed apparatus.  Six hours of class time per week is scheduled to accommodate: lectures, team working sessions, team meeting times and oral presentations.  Prerequisites:  ME 480 and Senior standing or permission of the mechanical Engineering advisor."578	Mechanical Engineering Technology			579	MTC 101	Introduction to Engineering Technology	2	"Required for all freshmen in Mechanical Engineering Technology.  Topics include academic requirements, advisement, software packages, career opportunities, and project management. Additional topics include professional, ethical and social responsibilities; respect for diversity and a knowledge of contemporary professional, societal and global issues; and a commitment to quality, timeliness and continuous improvement.  Cross listed with CTC/ITC 101."580	MTC 136	Material Science Applications	2	"Composition, structure, and behavior of metallic and nonmetallic materials, and their effect on the physical, mechanical, and electrical properties of that material.  Analysis of crystalline structure, physical properties, and service analysis of materials for physical, mechanical, and electrical properties."581	MTC 162	Computer Aided Design	4	The use of AutoCAD software to develop geometric models for engineering technology applications.  Blue print reading and basic drawing fundamentals.  Basic geometric dimensioning and tolarancing.  Introduction to the creation and visualization of three-dimensional models.  Four hours of lecture per week.  Laboratory activity will be substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Cross listed with CTC 162. 582	MTC 198	Industrial Instrumentation	2	"A freshman-level course that teaches the fundamentals of devices and methods used to instrument industrial processes and commercial products.  Focuses on conventional instruments, electro-mechanical transducers, and computer-based data acquisition equipment and techniques.  Two hours of lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Prerequisite:  Introductory Physics, Algebra, and Trigonometry.  Students who completed this course cannot take MTC 398 for credit."583	MTC 210	"Introductory Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning (HVAC)"	2	"Topics include principles of fluid mechanics, thermodynamics and heat transfer relevant to HVAC, concepts of air conditioning, principles of mechanical refrigeration, psychrometrics and load estimating.  Two hours of lecture per week."584	MTC 211	Manufacturing Processes	4	"Machining and non-machining methods of processing materials into manufactured components will be discussed. Both traditional and non-traditional machining processes are covered. Machine shop equipment and practices, along with different types of tooling, will be reviewed. Two hours of lecture and four hours of laboratory per week. Prerequisite: MTC 162."585	MTC 215	Sustainable Energy Systems	2	"An introduction to sustainable energy systems.  Topics include solar energy, wind energy, fuel cell technology, biomass energy, geothermal energy, clean coal technology, ocean energy, hydraulic power, and nuclear power.  Two hours of lecture per week.  Cross listed with ETC 215 and CTC 215."586	MTC 218	Statics	2	"Analysis of equivalent systems of forces, free body diagrams, equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies, centroids, friction, and forces in structures.  Two hours of lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Prerequisites:  PHY 101T, PHY 101L and MAT 120.  Cross listed with CTC 218."587	MTC 220	Introductory Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology	2	"Topics include working principles of fuel cells, types of fuel cells, hydrogen production, hydrogen safety, hydrogen engines and vehicles, hybrid solar hydrogen car and hydrogen economy.  Two hours of lecture per week."588	MTC 222	Strength of Materials	2	"Effect of shape and composition on strength of materials.  Moments of inertia, shear forces and bending moments in beams, torsion of shafts, thermal expansion, and pressure vessels.  Two hours lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Prerequisites:  PHY 101T, PHY 101L, MAT 120 and MTC 218.  Cross listed with CTC 222."589	MTC 240	Solid Modeling and 3D Printing	2	"The fundamentals of feature-based solid modeling with standard 3D CAD software, graphical modeling of mechanical parts and assemblies, design and creation of 3D printed components.  Two hours of lecture per week.  Students who have taken MTC 405 may not take this course for credit.  Prerequisite:  MTC 162 or equivalent.  "590	MTC 290	Introduction to Nanotechnology	4	"An introductory course covering fundamentals of nanotechnology and its applications.  Course content will cover diverse nanosystems including carbon nanotubes, semiconductor quantum dots, nanosensensors, molecular machines, and nanomedicine. The course will also survey the operation principles of the instruments used for nanostructures characterization and nanofabrication techniques.  Prerequisite: PHY 101T and PHY 101L; CHE 110T and CHE 110L; or permission of instructor.  Cross listed with ETC 290."591	MTC 301	Professionalism in the Work Place	2	"Topics include lifelong learning; professional, ethical and social responsibilities; respect for diversity and a knowledge of contemporary professional, societal and global issues; and a commitment to quality, timeliness, and continuous improvement. Cross listed with CTC 301."592	MTC 308	Mechanical Components	4	"Fundamental principles of design, working stresses, analysis and design of mechanical components such as shafting, springs, screws, belts, and chains. Four hours of lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted for lecture as appropriate. Prerequisites: MTC 218 and MTC 222 or equivalent, or permission of instructor."593	MTC 320	Applications Project I	2	"Individual student designed project in a major field, includes: written specifications of project requirements, project plan, milestone identification, implementation, and descriptive report.  An oral presentation regarding the project is required.  Course includes a one-hour lecture per week.  Students will work on an independent basis for the other hour."594	MTC 321	Applications Project II	2	"Individual student designed project in a major field, includes: written specifications of project requirements, project plan, milestone identification, implementation, and descriptive report.  An oral presentation regarding the project is required.  Course includes a one-hour lecture per week.  Students will work on an independent basis for the other hour."595	MTC 327	Production & Operations Management	4	"Modern production and operations management in an industrial setting.  Planning, organizing, and controlling using the relevant qualitative and quantitative approaches.  Covers topics such as forecasting, capacity requirement, planning, work standards, scheduling, fundamentals of inventory control, and material requirement planning."596	MTC 330	Assistive Technology	2	"Introduction to the fundamentals of assistive technology for people with physical disabilities.  Rehabilitation engineering with an emphasis on mechanical devices used to enhance mobility and manipulation, improving physical interaction with the environment.  Topics include: prosthetics, manual wheelchairs, power wheelchairs, and alternative methods for computer access.  Two hours of lecture per week.  Cross listed with ETC 330."597	MTC 352	Thermodynamics	2	"Energy determination science for fluids systems. Enthalpy, entropy, and internal energy properties.  Problems in energy state change, steady flow within elementary mechanical systems, and the measurement of energy."598	MTC 362	Experimental Stress Analysis	4	"Empirical determination of stresses in mechanical components.  Static and dynamic stress analysis of combined tension, torsion, and bending loads.  Use of commercial instrumentation. Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week."599	MTC 363	Mechanisms Analysis and Design	4	"The kinematic study of mechanisms, including velocity and acceleration analysis of linkages, cams, and gears in mechanical systems. Introduction to inertia forces in uniform motion machinery. Prerequisites: MTC 218 and MAT 122 or equivalents. "600	MTC 373	Statistical Quality Control	4	"Modeling and inferences of process quality.  Philosophy and methods of statistical process control and quality improvement in the modern business environment.  Techniques for quality troubleshooting, decision-making, and implementation.  Review of basic concepts or statistics will be included.  Prerequisite:  STA 100 or STA 225 or permission of instructor."601	MTC 388	Solid Modeling with Pro/ENGINEER	2	"Creating three-dimensional solid models of mechanical components using Pro/ENGINEER. Topics include feature-based modeling, protrusions, sweeps, blends and component assembly models. Two hours of lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted for lecture as appropriate.   "602	MTC 392	Micro- and Nano-Electromechanical Systems	4	"This course introduces the student to the emerging field of Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and to the more advanced level of miniaturization known as Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS).  Topics will include introduction of physical scaling laws, essential electrical and mechanical concepts, methods of fabrication and packaging of MEMS, principles of micro-actuation, emergence of nanoscale systems, visualization, and applications of micro and nano systems.  Prerequisite:  Prerequisite: PHY 101T and PHY 101L; CHE 110T and CHE 110L; or equivalent.  Cross listed with ETC 392."603	MTC 394	Nanoscale Materials	4	"Fundamental aspects of Nanoscale materials, including electronic states and electrical properties, optical properties and interactions of nanoscale materials, ultrafast dynamics of metal nanoparticles, magnetic and magneto transport properties. Prerequisite: PHY 101T and PHY 101L; CHE 110T and CHE 110L; or equivalent. Cross-listed with ETC 394."604	MTC 395	Semiconductor Microfabrication	4	"Processes specific for the Silicon fabrication of VLSI circuits. Crystal growth and crystal structure. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth, thermal oxidation, etching, metal deposition diffusion, ion implantation and photolithography. Process integration, MOS transistor fabrication, yield and reliability. Prerequisite: PHY 101T and PHY 101L; CHE 110T and CHE 110L; or equivalent. Cross listed with ETC 395. "605	MTC 398	Mechanical Measurements	4	"A junior-level course on devices and methods for measuring mechanical phenomena such as temperature, pressure, speed, displacement, acceleration, and force.  Uncertainty, accuracy, and precision of measurements are presented.  Focuses on electro-mechanical transducers and computer-based data acquisition techniques, experimental methods, analysis of collected data, and computer generation of technical reports.  Laboratory activity will be substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Students who have taken MTC 198 may not register and receive credit for MTC 398.  Prerequisites:  Introductory Physics, Algebra, Trigonometry."606	MTC 420	Capstone Experience	2	"Student-designed project in a focused mechanical area. Includes written specifications of project requirements, literature review, planning, milestone identification, implementation, and a comprehensive written report.  Projects must have a well-documented teamwork component. An oral presentation of the complete project is required. Course includes a one-hour lecture per week; students work on an independent basis for the other hour.  Student must have senior status."607	MTC 430	Engineering Dynamics	4	"Kinematics of particles, lines, and bodies, and the kinetics of particles and of rigid bodies with translation, rotation, and plane motion using the methods of forcemass acceleration, workenergy, and impulsemomentum.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisite: MAT 122 or equivalent."608	MTC 432	Process Control and Design of Experiments	4	"Quality philosophy and fundamental quality tools.  Process flow diagrams, control charts for variable measurement, process sampling and chart interpretation.  Methods for process optimization through single and multiple factor experimental designs.  Prerequisites: MAT 121, PHY 101T and PHY 101L.  Cross listed with ETC 432.  "609	MTC 442	Computer-Aided Manufacturing	4	"Basic concepts of Computer Assisted Manufacturing.  Computer aided process planning, material requirement planning, machinability data bases, computer numerical control systems, group technology, and integrated manufacturing systems.  Requires two hours of lecture and four hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites:  MTC 211 or permission of instructor."610	MTC 450	Solar Energy Concepts	4	"Energy resources, energy consumption patterns, and future energy supplies.   Physical, technical, and economical aspects of solar energy as a present and future source of energy. Stateoftheart applications of solar energy to domestic household applications.  Fourhour lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted for lectures as appropriate."611	MTC 454	Engineering Heat Transfer	4	"Introduction to heat transfer, steady state conduction-one & multi dimensions, unsteady state conduction, principles of convection, heat exchangers, condensation and boiling heat transfer, mass transfer, radiation heat transfer, special topics in heat transfer.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites:  MTC 352 or equivalent, or permission of instructor.  Students who have taken MTC 451 and/or MTC 452 may not register for MTC 454 for additional degree credit."612	MTC 455	Laser Technology	2	"Analysis of basic laser fundamentals, including optics and laser hardware.  Operational characteristics of specific laser systems. Twohour lecture per week, with laboratory work substituted appropriately."613	MTC 461	Fluid Mechanics and Systems	4	"Introduction to fluid mechanics.  Study of the principles of statics and dynamics applied to fluids.  Some of the topics covered are:  Pressure variation in fluids, flow in conduits, flow measurements, special topics in fluid mechanics, etc.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Students may not receive credit for both CTC 461 and MTC 461."614	MTC 462	Turbomachinery	4	"Application of the laws of thermodynamics and fluid mechanics to cascades, axial flow turbines and compressors, centrifugal pumps, fans and compressors, and radial flow turbines. Fourhour lecture per week with laboratory work substituted for lecture as appropriate.  Prerequisites: MTC 352 and MTC 461 or permission of instructor."615	MTC 464	Vibration Analysis	4	"Methods for computing natural frequency of mechanical vibrations in machinery.  Damped and forced vibrations of two dimensional, linear, or linearized systems, using both theoretical and instrumental investigations.  Analysis of absorbers and isolators.  Prerequisites:  MTC 218, MTC 222, and MAT 230."616	MTC 465	Advanced Machine Design	4	"In-depth study of major mechanical elements.  Topics include:  steady loading, variable loading, flexible elements, clutches, brakes, failure prevention theories, and metal fatigue.  Students are expected to integrate course material as well as previous experience into a major mechanical design project.  Prerequisites: MTC 218 and MTC 222, MTC 308 or MTC 362, and Calculus II, or permission of instructor."617	MTC 466	Wind Turbines	4	"Introduction to Wind Turbines.  Topics include: wind resources, aerodynamic principles, blade manufacture, control methods, performance testing, ecological effects, planning and regulations for wind energy development.  Prerequisite: MTC 461 or equivalent or permission of the instructor.  Four hours lecture per week."618	MTC 470	Mechanisms of Flow and Fractures in Machine Components	4	"The nature of plastic flow and the fracture in solids, applications to the propagation of cracks and failures in machine components. Roles of strengthening mechanisms to reduce failure will be emphasized. Laboratory exercises may be substituted for lecture when appropriate.   Prerequisites:  MTC 218, MTC 222 and MTC 336 or equivalents."619	MTC 471	Space Technology	2	"The course addresses the application of some of the wellknown principles of science and engineering in space technology.  The particular topics covered are: spacecraft structure, power systems, propulsion systems, fundamentals of spacecraft dynamics, orbital maneuvers, attitude maneuvers and control systems, spacecraft testing.  Students will research an individually selected topic on space technology and make written and oral presentations on it. Prerequisite: PHY 101T, PHY 101L or equivalent or permission of instructor."620	MTC 475	Economic Analysis in Technology	4	"Methods for choosing between alternatives based on the time value of money.  Replacement studies, depreciation and after-tax analysis, risk, uncertainty and sensitivity analysis.  Cross listed with CTC 475.  Prerequisite: MAT 121"621	MTC 476	Finite Element Applications	4	"Concepts of finite element analysis and their applications. Analysis of structure, plate, shell, pipes, plane stress and plane strains.  Extensive use of FEA software package ALGOR.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites:  MAT 122, MTC 218 and MTC 222, and a formal course in computing or permission of instructor."622	MTC 478	Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)	4	"The course addresses some of the fundamental aspects of computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD).  The specific topics covered in the course are: The Governing Equations of fluid Dynamics, Mathematical Behavior of Partial Differential Equations, Basic Aspects of Discretization, Grids with appropriate Transformations, CFD Techniques: The Lax-Wendroff  technique, MacCormack’s technique, some applications: One-dimensional Nozzle Flows, Two-Dimensional Supersonic Flow-Prandtl-Meyer Expansion Wave, Incompressible Couette Flow, Navier-Stokes equations.  Prerequisites: MTC 352 and 461 and MAT 230 or equivalent or permission of instructor."623	MTC 484	Thin Film Processing	4	"Thin film synthesis: the fundamentals of crystal structures, the basic nucleation and growth mechanisms.  Processes and technologies used for the thin film fabrication: chemical vapor deposition (CVD), Metal-organic CVD, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), Plasma Assisted-MBE, sputtering, evaporation, etc., thin film growth equipment operation principles and the fundamentals of vacuum technology and gas delivery systems.  Techniques for the monitoring and characterization of thin film parameters during the growth (in-situ) and after the growth (ex-situ).  Prerequisite: PHY 101T and PHY 101L; CHE 110T and CHE 110L; or equivalent.  Cross listed with ETC 484.1"624	MTC 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."625	MTC 494	CO-OP Assignment	2 to 4	"This course provides 14 weeks of supervised experience in an industrial or government installation, applying technology knowledge towards the solution of engineering technology problems, and developing abilities required in the student’s career.  At least three reports, two written and one oral, and two supervisors’ evaluations are required.  May be taken repetitively up to a maximum of four credits.  Prerequisite:  Permission of employer and Dean of Engineering Technology. "626	Music			627	MUS 301	SUNY Jazz	1	"Introduces students to the performance of jazz in an ensemble.  Study of basic jazz theory and improvisational techniques.  Analysis of musical styles and performers.  Students will rehearse ensemble works and perform in a public setting.  Prerequisite: Instructor’s permission, based on student’s ability to perform a musical instrument appropriate to jazz performances. Meets new General Education Arts requirement."628	Network and Computer Security			629	NCS 181	Introduction to Cybersecurity	4	Introduction to the field of information system security.  The kinds of information system security threats that might be faced by home and/or small business users and prudent security countermeasures used to counteract them are covered.  Security issues faced by users of information systems will be explained as well as the potential damage the may cause.  Provides the student with knowledge necessary to protect themselves against many of the information systems security threats faced in everyday life.630	NCS 205	 Introduction to Linux	4	"Linux operating system fundamentals with a focus on system administration and networking services.  System administration topics include the Linux command line, managing users, shell scripting, system services, system hardening, and software installation.  Linux networking topics include networking services DNS, SSH, DHCP, routing, and security.  Significant time will be spent working with the command line on a Linux system.  Prerequisites: CS 100, CS 108, or equivalent.  "631	NCS 210	Telecommunications Transmission Technology	4	"This course will familiarize students with the three principal transmission technologies used in data communications: copper wire, fiber optics, and radio frequency wireless.  Each physical layer medium is covered in detail to understand the nature of the communications channel it provides, and the impairments that affect data communications signals.  Transmission media standards, signaling, loss budgets, and the relative advantages and disadvantages of each transmission technology will be treated in detail.  "632	NCS 315	Networking of Information Systems	4	An integrated study of fundamental principles and representative technologies underlying computer and device networks.  Topics include: key networking protocols and relevant implementation stacks; interconnection devices; sample distribution software frameworks; management issues in networked computers and peripherals; deployment requirements for distributed software applications; common tools for the management of networks and distributed software.  Prerequisite: IS 310.633	NCS 316	Data Network Design	4	"Data network design issues and applications, pointtopoint network design, multipoint network design, data collection and verification and an overview of protocols.  Network design tools such as ITGURU and OPNET are used for network design and simulation.  Use of simulation results to design a private line or packet switched based data communications network.  Three hours of lecture and one hour of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites:  NCS 315 and STA 100."634	NCS 320	Information Assurance Fundamentals	4	"A fast paced introduction to the field of Information Assurance.  The various kinds of threats that might be faced by an information system and the security techniques used to thwart them are covered.  Hacker methods, viruses, worms, and system vulnerabilities are described with respect to the actions that must be taken by a Network Manager to combat them.  The basics of cryptography are covered including hash functions, symmetric cryptography, public key cryptography, cryptography algorithms, and cryptographic applications in computer and network security.  Prerequisites: CS 108, and NCS 181 or equivalent. "635	NCS 330	"Information Assurance Ethics, Policies and Disaster Recovery"	4	"This course covers the development of information systems security policies for small and large organizations with specific regard to components such as email, web servers, web browsers, firewalls, and personal applications.  The course covers cyber ethical standards for information system users and administrators, and their role as a driver in developing disaster recovery plans and procedures are also covered.  Prerequisites: NCS 181 or equivalent."636	NCS 350	Wireless Systems and Security	4	"Investigation of technologies, networks, standards and services of wireless systems in the context of satellite, cellular, wireless local area networks (802.11), personal area networks (Bluetooth and Zigbee) and metropolitan networks (WiMax). Specific topics to be examined include network design and infrastructure, 2G/3G cellular standards, wireless media access control protocols, wireless network routing, congestion control, location management, and security in wireless networks.  Prerequisites: NCS 210 and NCS 315."637	NCS 384	Network Intrusion Detection	4	The need for intrusion detection systems (IDS) is described.  Several basic IDS design approaches and implementation methods are presented.  Basic attack methods employed by network attackers and the resulting signatures are explained.  The business case for justifying the acquisition of IDS is explored.  Builds upon the foundations of Information Assurance covered in NCS 320.  Provides additional background and skills in the area of network IDS for those students interested in the areas of network and data security.  Prerequisites:  NCS 315 and NCS 320.638	NCS 416	Digital and Internet Telephony	4	"Consists of both lecture and application oriented lab assignments.  Emphasizes digital and internet telephony fundamentals including the convergence of voice, data and multimedia communications using the Internet Protocol.  Three hours of lecture and two hours of laboratory.  Prerequisite:  NCS 210 and NCS 315."639	NCS 425	Internetworking	4	"Intended to introduce new content and extend previously learned networking skills which will empower students to enter the workforce and/or further their education in the area of telecommunications networking.  A task analysis of current industry standards and occupational analysis is used in the development of content standards.  Instruction introduces and extends the student’s knowledge and practical experience with switches.  Local area networks (LAN’s) and Virtual Local Area Networks (VLAN’s) design, configuration and maintenance.  Students develop practical experience in skills related to configuring LAN’s, WAN’s, routing protocols and network troubleshooting.  Prerequisite: IS 315."640	NCS 430	Penetration Testing	4	"An in-depth hands-on experience in the area of Penetration testing. Students will study the fundamentals and key steps of a penetration test, as well as gain hands-on experience and exposure to the tools and methods utilized by networking security professionals while conducting white hat penetration tests in a controlled lab environment. A large portion of this course is based on hands-on red team activities that require the delivery of detailed documentation that outlines the processes employed in order to achieve the goals of the exercise. Prerequisites: NCS 315, CS 307. "641	NCS 435	Computer Forensics	4	"Introduction into the field of computer forensics in networked systems.  The student will receive training in the methods, techniques and tools used by those practicing computer forensics in support of audit, security privacy and legal functions.  Specific legal issues regarding seizure and chain of custody will be addressed.  Students will have opportunity to learn computer forensics applications, methods and procedures through hands-on lab activities.  Prerequisites: NCS 210, NCS 315, NCS 320."642	NCS 440	Virtualization	4	"An in-depth look at the area of virtualization and related current research topics.  This will be accomplished through lecture and interactive discussion of research papers, as well as hands-on experience with virtualization technologies.  Topics include: Virtualization Concepts and Theory, Security, Networking, Performance and Storage.  Pre-requisites:  NCS 315, CS 307.  "643	NCS 450	Network Security	4	"Detailed coverage of network threats, vulnerabilities and security protocols as countermeasures to advance the students’ understanding of computer security, network security, e-mail and internet security.  Focus is on security issues across the entire network protocol stack from the physical to the application layer.  Specific topics include physical layer security, secure routing protocols, IPsec, SSH, TLS, Web security, authentication and key management, and network borne malware such as worms and viruses.  Prerequisites: NCS 315."644	NCS 460	Advanced Wireless Security	4	"Provides advanced coverage of wireless networks and the special security problems they pose.  Topics include measures taken to secure wireless personal area networks (PAN’s), wireless LAN’s, cellular wireless networks, and ad-hoc wireless networks.  Threats, vulnerabilities and countermeasures specific to each type of networks will be enumerated and studied in detail.  Coverage includes the use of cryptography and cryptographic primitives in secure protocols, wireless device security, and security policy management.  The treatment of ad-hoc wireless network security will cover secure routing protocols and intrusion detection systems.  Prerequisites: NCS 350, NCS 450."645	NCS 490	Special Topics in Network and Computer Security	4	"An in-depth study of selected topics based on: new developments in the field, more in-depth treatment of topics than covered in regular courses, or topics not normally covered in an undergraduate program in Network and Computer Security.  Prerequisites: NCS 210, NCS 320, and permission of the instructor."646	NCS 494	Network and Computer Security Internship Coop	2 to 4	"Parttime supervised experience in a professional atmosphere which supplements classroom instruction.  Two written reports on the work experience, two supervisor's evaluations and one site interview required.  Required contact hours min. 150.  Prerequisite:  Permission of instructor."647	NCS 495	Network and Computer Security Capstone	2	Offers students the opportunity to demonstrate knowledge of network and computer security by completing and presenting a significant project. The topic should be of contemporary significance in the field. Periodic written and oral examinations are required. Prerequisites: Permission of the instructor. 648	Nursing			649	NUR 300	Transitions: Bridge to Baccalaureate Nursing Education	2	"The learner will be introduced to the role of the baccalaureate professional nurse.  Learners will maximize opportunities and benefits of obtaining a baccalaureate education.  Learners will explore the relationship of nursing literature and evidence based practice in professional nursing.  Concepts covered will prepare the learner for increased success throughout the nursing program, as they engage in adult learning principles and active learning concepts.  The learner will critically reflect on their beginning transition into a baccalaureate prepared professional nurse, fully engaged in the educational process. "650	NUR 313	Theoretical Bases for Professional Nursing Practice	3	Assessment of individuals across the life span is addressed as they experience wellness and illness.  The focus is on the interrelatedness of all components of health assessment.  Apply the framework of selected nursing theories of a comprehensive assessment of the individual’s health.  Health assessment skills are refined within the full scope of professional Nursing Practice.  Accountability and responsibility of the ethical nurse is emphasized.  Critical thinking skills are enhanced as the student develops a beginning level of competency in physical and psychological assessments within faculty supervised laboratory settings with well individuals.  Therapeutic communication skills are also facilitated throughout the obtainment of personal health data and the formulation of nursing diagnoses.  (Lab – 3 hours per week) Prerequisite: NUR 300.651	NUR 314	Comprehensive Health Assessment	3	Assessment of individuals across the life span is addressed as they experience wellness and illness.  The focus is on the interrelatedness of all components of health assessment.  Apply the framework of selected nursing theories of a comprehensive assessment of the individual’s health.  Health assessment skills are refined within the full scope of professional Nursing Practice.  Accountability and responsibility of the ethical nurse is emphasized.  Critical thinking skills are enhanced as the student develops a beginning level of competency in physical and psychological assessments within faculty supervised laboratory settings with well individuals.  Therapeutic communication skills are also facilitated throughout the obtainment of personal health data and the formulation of nursing diagnoses.  (Lab – 3 hours per week) Prerequisite: NUR 300.652	NUR 320A	Nursing Theory for Professional Nursing Practice	2	"A theoretical and empirical foundation within the discipline of nursing is essential to the formation of the professional nurse.  Selected nursing theories and Standards of Practice, as described in the New York State Education Law and the American Nurses’ Association (ANA) Standards of Professional Nursing Practice, are introduced to guide the accelerated RN/BS/MS student to further the development of their professional nursing practice. Critical reflection, caring, principles of teaching/learning, collaboration, role theory and development, and health and wellness are explored to develop the student’s understanding of nursing. Reflection and articulation of values and ideals within the profession and self are encouraged and described within personal philosophies of nursing.  Prerequisite:  NUR 300."653	NUR 325	Epidemiology in Nursing	2	"The concepts and methods of descriptive epidemiology are introduced and applied to health care delivery and professional nursing practice.  Patterns of acute and chronic disease occurrences and progression are studied.  The discovery of unusual disease patterns is also critically examined across culturally diverse communities.  Methods to uncover epidemiological causes, frequency, and the distribution of disease; and the critical appraisal of the literature and screening programs are explored to promote a theoretical and empirical foundation for practice.  The utilization of epidemiological information and evidenced-based data will be applied across populations to reduce risk, prevent disease, and optimize health among communities. Prerequisite: NUR 300."654	NUR 330A	Nursing Research for Professional Nursing Practice	2	"Professional standards of practice, the moral obligation to safeguard human subjects, and the ethic of care are emphasized as professional nurses participate in research activities. Learners critically review qualitative and quantitative research designs. The integration of knowledge from nursing, the arts, and sciences provides a basis for analyzing nursing research and applying this knowledge to professional nursing practice. The application of these studies as they relate to the foundation of practice, research utilization, and evidence based nursing is examined by students in the accelerated RN/BS/MS program. Prerequisite:  NUR 300."655	NUR 340A 	Nursing Leadership	1	"Designed for the accelerated RN to BS/MS programs of study, students learn to evaluate and integrate communication, management, change and leadership within the micro-systems of the healthcare institution. This course focuses on developing the leadership and management function of the professional nurse through a synthesis of knowledge from previous nursing courses, and leadership and management theories. Through the leadership project, the student will further develop and refine the skills necessary to coordinate, manage and deliver nursing care. Prerequisites: NUR 320A and 330A (or equivalent), current NYS Registered Professional Nurse license, Health Clearance."656	NUR 344	Ethical Issues in Nursing	2	"Provides the professional nurse with information regarding ethical and legal issues that they may confront in a variety of health care settings. The student will explore and discuss ethical issues utilizing theoretical knowledge emanating from a variety of theorists. The ANA Code of Ethics will be introduced, discussed, and applied to health care scenarios. The professional nurse will critically examine ethical issues and their ramifications and thus learn the importance of collaboration in ethical situations. Several ethical decision making models will be presented and discussed to assist the student in clarifying their personal and professional roles. The professional nurse will develop skills essential for ethical decision making through exploration of these topics. Prerequisite: NUR 300. "657	NUR 377	Introduction to Clinical Nursing Education	2	"This introductory course will explore the functions of the clinical nurse educator.  This course will provide a practical approach to clinical nursing instruction.  Evidence-based clinical teaching methodologies will be explored, with emphasis on the process of educating a diverse nursing body."658	NUR 381	Nursing Education and Instruction for Long Term Care	2	"Students will examine nurse educator competencies and apply principles of teaching and learning, adult learning theory, critical reflection, and active learning strategies to teach nurses and other health care personnel in clinical and classroom settings. A variety of informational sources such as lecture, discussions groups, and web enhanced instruction will be explored and related to personal experiences in service and academic learning environments. Research, literature, and case studies supporting these techniques with plans for assessment of learning outcomes will be explored throughout this course to enhance one’s teaching practice. "659	NUR 383	Palliative Care	2	"In recognition of the universal need for humane end-of-life care, it is essential that nurses appreciate their unique opportunity and responsibility for insuring that individuals at the end of life experience a peaceful death.  Recognition of the limits and inappropriate use of technological resources and apprehensions of the public about suffering and expenses associated with dying contribute to a renewed interest in humane end-of-life care.  Precepts underlying palliative care principles are crucially examined and include the assumptions that individuals live until the moment of death; that care is sensitive to diversity, and gives attention to the physical, psychological, and spiritual concern of the patient and the patient’s family.  By stimulating scholarly discourse on this important reality, this course serves as a catalyst for integrating palliative care into traditional models of care delivery."660	NUR 384 	Evidence-based Practice in Nursing	2	The exploration and application of evidence-based practice (EBP) is the emphasis of this course. Students will learn how to solve practice problems by formulating and EBP question and answer it using the best evidence available. An in-depth look at performing literature searches and utilizing practice guidelines will be presented. EBP implementation models will help students learn the best way to explore practice questions and present change. Students will have the opportunity to exercise these skills through a written assignment and examination of internet resources (e.g. Cochrane Library).661	NUR 385	Transformational Leadership for Nurses	2	The exploration and application of transformational leadership for Nurses is the emphasis of this course. Students explore leadership styles and an innovation model to investigate the significance and application of transformational leadership. Profiles of leaders and analysis of team approaches are explored within a variety of practice arenas. Critical reflection of the individual nurse’s role as a leader and the student’s personal leadership development will be explored as it relates to transforming others.662	NUR 386	The Nurse Practice Act	2	The course provides an overview of the nurse practice act from its’ past to the present. It will assist the professional nurse in designing the nurse practice act of the future. The practice act and the influences affecting nursing practice and the health care delivery system will be discussed. 663	NUR 387 	History of Nursing	2	"Awareness of historical events in the discipline of nursing fosters socialization within the profession, facilitates comprehension of current nursing issues and prepares the nurse for future trends in the discipline. Critical reflection of the historical roots in nursing enhances the development of professional nursing roles. Exploration of nursing history promotes critical thinking skills and allows for understanding of the impact of historical events on practice today. "664	NUR 388	Civility and Horizontal Violence	2	"Violence between and among nurses is a behavioral interaction found within all types of workplace environments.  This course examines the nuances of horizontal violence among professionals within health care settings.  Emphasis on civility and preventing horizontal violence explored through effective communication strategies, anger management, and standards of professional behavior. "665	NUR 389	Introduction to Integrative Nursing	3	"Concepts of integrative or holistic nursing, as they apply to self-care and to client populations, are introduced in this course. Nursing theory in holistic practice is explored. The psychophysiology of mind-body healing is utilized as a basis for understanding nursing from a holistic perspective. A variety of complementary and alternative therapies (CAM) are investigated within the framework of evidence-based practice. "666	NUR 390	Nursing Research	3	"Professional standards of practice with the ethical obligation to safeguard human subjects impacts the professional nurses practice and participation in research activities.  Students learn to critically review qualitative and quantitative research designs and explore their relevance within culturally diverse populations.  The integration of knowledge from nursing, the arts, and sciences provides a basis for the development of critical reflection.  Students will apply critical reflection with peer collaboration to foster independent judgment and decision making in one’s practice.  The student will identify innovative approaches to healthcare through research and evidence based practice.  Prerequisites: NUR 313 and STA 100."667	NUR 444	Nursing Leadership	3	"The professional nurse functions in the role of leader, manager, collaborator, teacher, counselor, innovator and advocate in the delivery of health care to the client across the care continuum.  This course focuses on developing the leadership and management function of the professional nurse through a synthesis of knowledge from the arts and sciences, previous nursing courses, leadership and management theories, and professional ethics.  Using selected theories and relevant research findings, the student develops and refines the skills necessary to coordinate, manage, and deliver nursing care within the healthcare micro-system.  (30 hour precepted leadership clinical experience.)  Prerequisites: NUR 313, 390, 308 or 306 or 307, upper division writing course, matriculated status, all clinical requirements."668	NUR 455	Public Health Nursing Science	5	"The basic concepts of public and community health and their interrelationship with people, nursing, and the environment are examined.  Structure, function, and programs of the health care system are explored.  Critical reflection and research are used to assess and analyze culturally diverse populations and community resources as they impact health of populations at risk.  The concepts and methods of descriptive epidemiology are introduced and applied to health care delivery and professional nursing practice.  The professional role, ethics, and standards of public health theoretical frameworks.  Principles of teaching and learning, decision making, leadership, collaboration and management within the larger social system are analyzed for their impact on health care. Prerequisites: NUR 314, NUR 444. Pre/Co-Requisite: BIO 250, BIO 350. Co-requisite: NUR 474."669	NUR 474	Public Health Nursing Science Clinical	1	"A 45 hour clinical that builds on nursing theory and aspects of clinical practice, the focus is on health teaching and health care opportunities in a variety of culturally diverse community settings.  Population based practice, health promotion and disease prevention is emphasized at individual, family, community and system level.  Nursing family systems, developmental, and caring theories are applied to public health nursing.  Incorporating a multifaceted approach, levels of prevention, communication skills, transcultural assessment, epidemiology, and public/community health standards are examined and applied.  Opportunities for critical reflection, collaboration, professional growth, and lifelong learning are integrated within clinical experiences. (45 hour clinical component) Prerequisites: NUR 314, NUR 444, all clinical requirements. Pre/Co-requisites: BIO 250, BIO 350. Co-requisite: NUR 455"670	NUR 478	Care Management	4	"Focuses on the elements of care management of individuals and families across the health care continuum.  This course will expand upon the concepts of care transitions from hospital to the community setting with an emphasis on the challenges related to transitioning such as financial management, resource utilization, and overall care coordination.  Students will engage in analytic discussions to further develop their understanding of family systems, systems of care, clinical practice and community nursing roles.  Personal reflection on one’s own practice in contemporary nursing will be included in order to allow the student to think holistically, ethically and morally as they grapple with the real-world challenges and contemporary care management issues in our healthcare environment.  (20 hour clinical experience)  Prerequisites: NUR 455, NUR 474, all clinical requirements.  "671	NUR 490	Culminating Seminar	3	"The connections of nursing theory, research, and practice are the emphasis of this culminating experience.  Opportunity for collaboration with peers and faculty is provided as students develop and participate in research and scholarly activities.  Inquiry into scholarly works is explored to further enhance nursing knowledge, research utilization, and professional practice.  Personal values and beliefs are reexamined as the student describes one’s transformed view of self and practice as a maturing professional in nursing.  Critical reflection of one’s personal growth and commitment to ongoing professional development is examined within the context of achieving professional excellence.  (20 hour clinical experience) Prerequisite/Co-requisite:  NUR 478; Student must be within 4 credits of graduation at completion of Culminating Seminar.  "672	NUR 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"This is an independent study of selected contemporary problems within the nursing discipline.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, education goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned.  Prerequisites:  Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."673	Philosophy			674	PHI 101	Introduction to Philosophy	4	"An examination of the major figures, subfields, topics, and questions of western philosophy. The emergence of philosophy in Ancient Greece is almost synonymous with the emergence of Western Civilization. Furthermore, many developments in Western civilization have been founded on and/or enabled by developments in philosophy. This course will explore the major figures and issues of western philosophy. It will survey the major subfields of philosophy (epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, political philosophy, aesthetics) by examining their historical and intellectual development. In addition, philosophical figures and issues will be introduced by discussing their place within the larger historical context of Western Civilization. Finally, developments in western philosophy will be related to developments in non-western philosophy. Topics might include: knowledge and certainty, the mind/body problem, reality and being, the existence of God, freedom and determinism, the notion of the self, the good, justice, the state, beauty, and the nature of art. Meets General Education Western Civilization requirements.  "675	PHI 120	Introduction to Asian Philosophy	4	"An examination of the major traditions, foundational texts, and key figures in Asian philosophy.  The practice and concept of philosophy in a non-western context will be explored, and fundamental ontological, epistemological, ethical, and political questions will be addressed.  Geographic regions to be discussed include India, China, and Japan, and traditions to be studied could include Vedanta, Buddhism, Daoism, Confucianism, Moism, Legalism, and Zen.  Meets General Education Other World Civilizations requirement. "676	PHI 130	World Religions	4	"An examination of the origins, philosophies and development of the major religions of the world.  Ways of knowing other than western, science-oriented ones will be explored, and a fundamental knowledge of religious answers to questions about ultimate meaning will be pursued.  Religions to be studied include Hinduism, Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Confucianism, Jainism, Sikhism, Shinto, Taoism, and Zoroastrianism. Meets new General Education Other World Civilizations requirement."677	PHI 201	Ethical Theories and Problems	4	"An examination of the major ethical theories and contemporary ethical problems of western philosophy.  The basics of moral reasoning will be discussed, and both classic and modern ethical theories will be studies.  Ethical theories to be examined could include Virtue Ethics, Utilitarianism, Deontology, Moral Sentiment, Contractarianism, Existentialism, and Feminism, and these ethical theories will be applied to ethical problems, which could include abortion, euthanasia, famine, torture, capital punishment, terrorism, etc.  Meets General Education Humanities requirement. "678	PHI 350	Technology and Ethics	4	Traditional ethical theory and the problems in applying theory to contemporary technological situations.  Ethics in communication receives special emphasis. Meets new General Education Humanities requirement.679	PHI 360 	Environmental Philosophy and Technology	4	"An examination of the complex role that technology plays in philosophical and ethical questions concerning the natural environment.  While technology promises numerous solutions to the current environmental crisis (e.g., clean energy, geoengineering, bioremediation, etc.), it also undeniably contributes to the destruction of the environment (e.g., global warming, species extinction, pollution, etc.) This course will explore the ethical and philosophical issues that emerge from the intersection of technology and the natural environment.  It will also examine the influence that technology’s impact on the environment has on human society.  Topics may include: anthropocentrism vs. ecocentrism, genetically modified organisms, animal rights, resource inequality, subsistence vs. luxury emissions, asymmetrical distribution of the effects of global warming, geoengineering, and ecological restoration.  Meets new General Education Humanities requirement. "680	Physics			681	PHY 101T	General Physics I Theory	3	"Within an algebra-based framework, this course covers topics in classical mechanics, including the kinematics in one and two dimensions, the Newton’s laws of motion, work and energy, linear momentum, rotational motion, and selected topics on vibration and waves.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course PHY 101L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (PHY 101T and PHY 101L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Prerequisites: MAT 111 or equivalent.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."682	PHY 101L	General Physics Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany PHY 101T.  Application of theoretical material from General Physics I Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course PHY 101T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (PHY 101T and PHY 101L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category.  "683	PHY 102T	General Physics II Theory	3	"Within an algebra-based framework, this course covers topics in electricity and magnetism, including electric forces and fields, electric potential, electric current, DC circuit, magnetism, electromagnetic induction, and selected topics from electromagnetic waves and optics.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course PHY 102L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (PHY 102T and PHY 102L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Prerequisite: PHY 101T and PHY 101L.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category. "684	PHY 102L	General Physics II Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany PHY 102T.  Application of theoretical material from General Physics II Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course PHY 102T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (PHY 102T and PHY 102L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."685	PHY 201T	Calculus Based Physics I Theory	3	"Within a mathematical framework that includes basic geometry, trigonometry, algebra, calculus and vectors, this course covers topics in mechanics including kinematics of one, two and three dimensional motion, dynamics and Newton’s laws of motion, work, kinetic energy, potential energy, kinematics and dynamics of rigid bodies, and periodic motion.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course PHY 201L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (PHY 201T and PHY 201L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites. Prerequisite: MAT 151 or equivalent. Co-requisite: MAT 152. Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."686	PHY 201L	Calculus Based Physics I Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany PHY 201T.  Application of theoretical material from Calculus Based Physics I Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course PHY 201T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (PHY 201T and PHY 201L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."687	PHY 202T	Calculus Based Physics II Theory	3	"This course covers topics on electricity and magnetism, including Coulomb’s Law, Electric Potential, Capacitance and Dielectrics, Current, Resistance, Electromotive Force, Magnetic Fields, Biot-Savart’s Law, Ampere’s Law, Electromagnetic Induction, Faraday’s Law, Maxwell’s Equations, and selected topics on the Electromagnetic Waves.  Three hours of lecture each week.  This class must be taken with the laboratory course PHY 202L in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (PHY 202T and PHY 202L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Prerequisite:  PHY 201 or equivalent.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."688	PHY 202L	Calculus Based Physics II Laboratory	1	"Laboratory section to accompany PHY 202T.  Application of theoretical material from Calculus Based Physics II Lecture in experimental procedures.  Three hours of laboratory each week.  This class must be taken with the lecture course PHY 202T in the same semester.  Successful completion of both co-requisite lecture and lab courses (PHY 202T and PHY 202L) is required.  Should a student need to repeat one co-requisite, they must repeat both co-requisites.  Meets SUNY General Education Natural Science category."689	PHY 203	Calculus Based Physics III	4	"The third course in three course calculus based physics sequence.  Covers selected topics from thermodynamics (temperature and heart, thermal properties of matter and laws of thermodynamics) and waves (mechanical waves, wave interference and normal modes).  Includes lecture and laboratory.  Prerequisite:  PHY 202 or equivalent."690	PHY 220	Electronics for Scientists	4	"Designed to give students who do not intend to become Electrical Engineers or Technologists a good background in the field of analog and digital electronics.  Upon completion of this course, the student should have a practical understanding of test equipment and basic analog circuits such as power supplies, analog switches of operational amplifiers as well as a practical understanding of the operation and use of digital integrated circuits and their application to more complicated data acquisition systems used in modern chemical instrumentation.  Three hours of lecture and three hours laboratory per week.  May not be taken be electrical engineering, electrical technology or computer engineering technology students.  Prerequisite: One year of high school physics or equivalent. "691	PHY 290	Topics in Physics	1 to 4	An introductory course in selected topics in Physics not currently covered in any of the listed classes. Topics are chosen to illustrate different fields and applications which are all part of Physics.692	PHY 351	Modern Physics	4	"Provides a broad overview of the major developments and breakthroughs in physics since the beginning of the 20th century, including Einstein’s special theory of relativity, quantum nature of light, wave nature of particles, introduction to quantum mechanics, atomic structure, molecular and condensed mater physics, nuclear physics, particle physics and cosmology.  Includes three hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week.  Prerequisites: PHY 202T, PHY 202L and MAT 230 or equivalents."693	PHY 361	Intermediate Mechanics	4	"Newtonian theory is used to describe the mechanical behavior of objects.  Topics include: Newton’s laws of motion, momentum and energy, motion of a particle in one or more dimensions, motion of a system of particles, rigid body motion, introduction to Lagrange and Hamilton’s equations.  Prerequisites:  MAT 230, MAT 253, and PHY 201T and PHY 201L or equivalents."694	PHY 371	Electromagnetism	4	"The laws of electricity and magnetism are developed using the language of vector calculus.  Topics include: Coulomb's Law,  the electrostatic field and potential, Gauss' Law, dielectrics, capacitors, electric current, the steady magnetic field, BiotSavart Law, Ampere's Law, magnetic materials, Faraday's Law, the displacement current, Maxwell's Equations, and plane electromagnetic waves.  Prerequisites:  MAT 230, MAT 253, and PHY 202T and PHY 202L or equivalents."695	PHY 381	Quantum Mechanics	4	"An introduction to the theory and applications of Quantum Mechanics.  Topics will include:  waveparticle duality, Heisenberg uncertainty principle, quantum states and operators, Schroedinger equation and quantum statistics.  Applications will be selected from atomic and solid state physics, including semiconductors and lasers.  Prerequisites:  MAT 260/230, MAT 253, PHY 351 or equivalents."696	PHY 472	Electromagnetic Waves and Radiation	4	"Within an advanced mathematical framework that involves vector and tensor algebra, differential and integral calculus, methods of ordinary and partial differential equations, and special techniques of electromagnetism, this course studies the solutions of the Maxwell’s equations (a system of coupled partial differential equations) in various physical situations. It provides an in depth analytical study of electromagnetic waves, their structure, propagation, reflection, transmission, interaction with matter and the mechanisms for their generation by antennas.  Prerequisite is Electromagnetism (PHY 371) or equivalent. "697	PHY 490	Special Topics in Physics	4	A detailed examination of a topic in physics not treated extensively in other physics courses.  Prerequisite: Permission of instructor.698	PHY 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisite: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area. "699	Political Science			700	POS 110	American Public Policy	4	An introduction to the major features of the policy making process in the United States.  Emphasis on the structures and institutions of the American political system and the role of citizens in political process.  Examination of democratic theory and political philosophy in the American context.  Meets new General Education Social Science requirement.701	POS 262	Online Politics	4	"The emergence of the Internet, and especially the Web, as a significant factor in American and global life has challenged traditional views of communication and politics.  In this course, we use some core concepts of political communication, information design and technology, and deliberative democracy to examine the role of information technologies in candidate and issue campaigning, online voting, protest and advocacy movements, law-making and electronic governance.  Students will be required to engage as participant-observers of a Web-based political activity using a methodological approach appropriate to their analysis.    Meets the General Education Social Sciences requirement."702	POS 252	The Politics of Life and Death	4	"Examines the nature of political debate and policy-making in the United States on issues related to human life.  Four issues will be examined:  assisted reproduction, human cloning, abortion, and assisted suicide.  For each of the issues, we will review the scientific and philosophical context, assess the actions of the legislative, judicial, executive and administrative branches of the national and state governments, and explore the nature of public discourse.  This course assumes an interest in and understanding of American politics and political institutions.  Though not a prerequisite, completion of an introductory course in American politics is recommended prior to enrollment. Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."703	POS 340	Elections and Political Behavior	4	"An exploration into the roots and consequences of political behavior with a focus on the ""average"" citizen.  Topics include the formation and importance of political values, the dimensions of political participation, and the implications of empirical evidence for electoral strategy and contemporary democratic theory. Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."704	POS 342	Constitutional Law	4	"An examination of the Constitution of the United States and its interpretation by the judiciary, with an emphasis on the activities of the Supreme Court.  Analysis of issues concerning the separation of powers, federal-state relationships, economic regulation, and political and civil rights. Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."705	POS 400	Topics in Political Science	4	"An indepth examination of a current topic in political science. Examples might include political psychology, media and politics, political ethics, and presidential elections. May be taken more than once as topics change."706	POS 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisites: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area."707	POS 492	Political Science Internship	1 to 4	"Internship is designed to provide practical work in a position related to political science or public policy, and to compare and contrast real-world experience with scholarly assessment of political actors or behavior.  Students either work on or off campus.  Minimum of 45 hours of contact time per credit required.  Prerequisite:  Permission of faculty member; approval of internship agreement. Only S/U grades are awarded for this course."708	Psychology			709	PSY 100	Principles of Psychology	4	"Surveys the field of psychology, emphasizing issues of current importance.  Topics covered include research methodology and the influence of biological, social, and environmental factors on behavior. No credit will be given to students who have previously taken an introductory psychology course. Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."710	PSY 220	Life-span Developmental Psychology	4	"Examines the physical, cognitive, social, and emotional development of individuals from conception to death. Special attention is given to the environmental and biological factors that contribute to normal development in childhood, adolescence, adulthood and aging. Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent. "711	PSY 222	Abnormal Psychology	4	"Examines the dimensions, theories, and empirical findings in human psychopathology.  Topics covered will include:  concepts of abnormality, theories, classification, etiology, assessment, and treatment of the major psychopathologies.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent."712	PSY 242	Social Psychology	4	"Examines principles of social behavior in a variety of settings.  Topics include: attitude formation and change, group dynamics, interpersonal attraction, social perception, altruism, and aggression.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent."713	PSY 262	Learning and Motivation	4	"Examines historical and modern concepts of learning and motivation, Pavlovian and operant conditioning, and their application.  The relationship of learning to motivation and physiological, cognitive, and social theories of motivation will also be discussed.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent."714	PSY 273	"Dying, Death & Bereavement"	4	"Examines psychosocial conceptualizations of dying, death and grief in contemporary society with special emphasis on one's own feelings and attitudes towards death and coping and supportive strategies of the dying and bereaved persons.  Sociocultural, legal/ethical issues are also explored.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent or permission of instructor."715	PSY 290	Special Topics in Psychology	4	"PSY 290: Special Topics in Psychology would afford students the opportunity to take a wider range of courses than the current curriculum allows.  Whereas PSY 490 (Selected Topics in Psychology) is designed to allow in-depth treatment of psychological subject matter, PSY 290 would be run as a survey course of a general subject area in psychology (e.g. Youth and Adolescence, Urban Issues, Culture).  Reading materials and assignments would vary, depending on topic and instructor.  However, each instructor teaching PSY 290 will ensure that the course is structured to include coverage of basic concepts, theory, and methodologies associated with the field, written assignment(s) requiring critical analysis of course material, and opportunities for students to develop oral presentation skills. Restricted to Psychology majors.  "716	PSY 310	Research Methods in Psychology	4	This lecture and laboratory course will provide experience in the use of a variety of research designs and methods of data analysis. Students design research projects in small groups by selecting an appropriate sampling procedure and devising a method of collecting and analyzing data.  Prerequisites: STA 100 or equivalent and PSY 305 or permission of instructor.717	PSY 325	Psychology of Gender	4	Reviews the major findings and theories related to sex roles and sex typing.  It will also examine gender specific issues (e.g. motherhood/fatherhood).  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent.718	PSY 331	Psychology of Personality	4	"A study of determinants of personality and methods of studying personality, including various systems of psychology and their interpretations of personality structure and development. Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent."719	PSY 352	Industrial and Organizational Psychology	4	"Examines the behavior of people in industrial work environments.  Topics include attitudes toward work, organizational climate, appraising employee performance and interest, engineering psychology, worker efficiency, accident behavior, leadership styles, and effectiveness.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent."720	PSY 360	Perception	4	"A presentation of the basic facts and theories of human perception, concentrating primarily on vision. Topics to be covered include psychophysics, form and space perception, the constancies, the effects of learning, motivation, and set on perception, selective attention, and perceptual development.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent."721	PSY 365	Educational Psychology	4	"Provides an overview of the psychological theory and research in relation to educational practices.  Cognitive, motivational, interpersonal and socio-cultural influences on learning and retention in educational institutions will be examined. Characteristics and developmental needs of the learner throughout lifespan, along with evaluative measures of learning/instructions will be considered.  Prerequisite: PSY 100."722	PSY 377	Health Psychology	4	"Health and illness is experienced within a broad psychosocial context.  Physical states affect mental states and mental and emotional experiences have the capacity to influence the course of physical health and illness.  Investigates the relationship that exists between physical and mental health.  Emphasizes the role that psychological, cultural and social factors have for both physical health and illness, and also examines stress and stress management techniques. Prerequisite: PSY 100."723	PSY 385	Evaluation Research	4	"Application of various research methods to the planning, monitoring, and evaluation of social intervention programs.  Topics include research design, questionnaire construction, survey methods, computer applications, and the critical analysis of evaluation studies. Assignments in class and field settings will provide students with practical experience in the design of evaluation studies, data collection and analysis, and the writing of evaluation reports. Prerequisite: PSY 310 or SOC 332 or equivalent."724	PSY 390	Engineering Psychology and Human Performance	4	"Deals with the systematic application of relevant information about human capabilities and limitations to design of things and procedures people use.  Topics include: information displays, acquisition of skills, personmachine system properties, work space, applied anthropometry, accidents, and psychological factors in transportation.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent."725	PSY 405	History and Systems of Psychology	4	Examines theoretical systems of psychology in historical perspective.  Classical and contemporary theories of human behavior will be analyzed in terms of their impact on various fields of psychology. Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent. Restricted to Psychology majors only. 726	PSY 410	Forensic Psychology	4	"The focus of this course will be to examine the relationship between psychology and the legal system. The format is designed to be a combination of lecture, in-class discussion, and online work. Video clips/documentaries and professional work samples/case examples will also be utilized. Course readings, assignments, and class discussions will facilitate the following goals: To survey the major areas of interest shared by psychology and law; to discuss some of the major ethical dilemmas faced by mental health professionals working with legal system; to become familiar with different types  of forensic psychological evaluations conducted in criminal cases; to become familiar with some of the landmark legal case that impact forensic psychologists; to be introduced to various career opportunities in forensic psychology.  Prerequisite:  PSY 100 or equivalent.  "727	PSY 415	Psychology of Aggression and Nonviolence	4	"Deals with the factors associated with aggression and nonaggression.  Topics include theories of aggression, control of aggression, personality patterns of violent and nonviolent individuals, psychology of power, conflict resolution, and techniques for teaching nonviolent behavior.  Prerequisites: PSY 305 or PSY 315 or PSY 331 or PSY 242 or permission of instructor."728	PSY 425	Cognitive Psychology	4	"A survey of memory, thinking, language, and problem solving.  The course will follow the history of psychological theory on cognition from associationism to gestalt approaches to modern information processing approaches and artificial intelligence. Particular attention will be paid to practical and clinical applications of research.  Prerequisite: PSY 262 or PSY 360 or permission of instructor."729	PSY 444	Applied Social Psychology	4	"Intended to expose students to interventions by social psychologists in realworld problem solving.  Topics include applied nature of social psychology; social psychology of education, religion and politics; crosscultural psychology; social psychology and legal issues; consumer behavior; social psychology and social policy; and conservation and environmental concerns.  Prerequisites:  PSY 305 or PSY 331 or PSY 242 or PSY 352 or equivalent or permission of instructor."730	PSY 445	Group Dynamics and Interpersonal Communication	4	"Examines interaction in small groups.  Topics include group structure and development, and aspects of group process such as problemsolving, decisionmaking, productivity, creativity, power, conflict resolution, leadership, and communication.  Skill in application of concepts of group dynamics is developed through exercises in experiential learning and observation.  Prerequisite: PSY 242 or PSY 352 or equivalent."731	PSY 460	Neuropsychology	4	"The mind arises from the brain and every topic in psychology has a biological basis.  This course is a survey of the biological bases of a wide array of topics, including perception, motivation, emotion, bodily movement, learning, memory and language.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or equivalent."732	PSY 470	Psychological Testing	4	"Examines the basic concepts of measurement theory and their application to developing, administering, and interpreting psychological tests.  Moral, ethical, and legal issues associated with testing and the use of test results are considered.  Prerequisites: PSY 222 or PSY 331 or PSY 352 or equivalent."733	PSY 477	Principles of Psychological Counseling	4	"Examines the theories and techniques used in counseling situations.  Special attention will be given to interviewing skills, ethical issues, and the interpersonal dynamics that comprise the major therapeutic approaches.  Prerequisites:  PSY 222 or PSY 331 or equivalent, or permission of instructor."734	PSY 490	Selected Topics in Psychology	4	An in depth treatment of a selected topic in Psychology.  Provides students with the opportunity to investigate psychological subject matter.  Students may receive credit in a future semester for different topic areas.  Prerequisite: PSY 100 or an introductory psychology course.735	PSY 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, method of evaluation, and number of credits to be earned. Prerequisite: Matriculated students only, permission of instructor and dean of subject area. "736	PSY 492	Practicum in Psychology	4	"Supervised, disciplinerelated experience in a community service agency is provided.  The major emphasis is to help the student in applying theoretical knowledge to real life situations, and to develop skills and competence as a professional.  Regular meetings with agency supervisor and practicum coordinator are an essential feature of the practicum.  Minimum GPA 3.0 and permission of the psychology department are required for admission.  Prerequisites: PSY 305, PSY 310, and PSY 385 or equivalent.  This course will not be a substitute for one of the three advanced courses required to complete the credits to major in the Psychology program."737	PSY 493	Senior Seminar in Psychology	4	"Special topics of current interest and relevance are treated indepth.  Emphasis is placed on the critical analysis of current research literature and development of independent projects by seminar members.  Topics vary from semester to semester.  Prerequisites: Senior standing, PSY 310 and PSY 385 or equivalent and permission of instructor."738	Recreation 			739	See Health and Physical Activity			740	"Science, Technology, and Society"			741	STS 200	"Introduction to Science, Technology, and Society"	4	"Science and technology are integral parts of our society and our lives today.  They influence the way we live and work and affect the way we understand ourselves and the world around us.  Yet what, exactly, are science and technology?  How do scientists develop new knowledge, and how do engineers and technologists develop new technologies?  How do technologies affect our lives and our society?  This course examines those issues by exploring the social dimensions of science and technology and by looking at the interactions and interrelationships among science, technology, and society.  We will explore: 1.) the practice of science and technology to understand how scientific and technological work is conducted as a creative and human enterprise; 2.) how science and technology are shaped by different social and economic forces; and 3.) the impacts of science and technology on society. "742	STS 490	"Topics in Science, Technology and Society"	1 to 4	"An in-depth examination of particular topics in science, technology and society.  Topics may include: Science, Technology, and Identity; Science, Technology, and the Environment; Science, Technology, and Gender; Science, Technology and Religion; Science, Technology, and Science Fiction.  Typically, a topics course will use two or three general textbooks, and every student will be required to perform research on a particular issue related to the topic.  May be taken more than once as topics change."743	STS 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Extensive study and research on a particular topic of student interest under the supervision of a faculty member.  The student is required to submit a written proposal which includes a description of the project, its duration, educational goals, methods of evaluation, and the number of credits to be earned.  Prerequisites: STS 300 and permission of instructor and dean of subject matter."744	Sociology			745	SOC 100	Introduction to Sociology	4	"Introduces the sociological perspective in understanding the everyday lives of members of a society.  Emphasizes the influence of socialization, culture, inequality, institutionalization, conflict and collective behavior.  Focuses primarily on the United States. Meets new General Education Social Science requirement.  Senior Sociology majors may not register for this course."746	SOC 110	Social Problems	4	"Examines social problems in industrial society, and how social institutions can lead to their creation, perpetuation, and solution.  Focuses on particular social issues, such as poverty, power, race, ethnicity, gender roles, work, health, education, and war. Explores similarities and differences between sociological and other social science approaches to the study of social problems.  Emphasis placed on the United States. Meets new General Education Social Science requirement."747	SOC 210	Sociology of the Family	4	"Analyzes the nature of gender roles in the family, a basic social institution.  Examines various patterns of family organization and problems confronting the family. Emphasizes the family in the United States.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."748	SOC 220 	Sociology of Gender	4	"Explores contemporary theories, understandings and performances of gender, with attention to the intersections of race, class, gender and sexuality. Also examines the relationships of gender to life opportunities and experiences, social structures and societal reproduction. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."749	SOC 230	Sociology of Racial and Ethnic Relations	4	"Explores the complex and dynamic nature of race and ethnicity in American society, with a combined focus on historic and ethnographic approaches. Topics covered include the patterns of racial and ethnic inequality, the evolving social construction of race and ethnicity, the changing perceptions of and explanations for race relations, the intersection of race and ethnicity with other forces (such as social class and gender), and the social pressure for and against assimilation and acculturation. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."750	SOC 240	Class Inequality: Poverty and Wealth in the United States	4	"Focuses on income inequality in the United States, as defined as by an unequal distribution of wealth, power, and status. Addresses how inequality has become institutionalized, thereby becoming an important part of the everyday, taken-for-granted operation of society. Acknowledges how changes in these arrangements are resisted and how those groups at the bottom of the power hierarchy may acquiesce in their own exploitation. Examines the influence of economic systems, the race and gender systems, belief systems, political systems and state systems on inequality structures. Assesses the utility of qualitative research in providing a subjectivist understanding of poverty. Requires an experiential activity that may be off-campus. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."751	SOC 250	Sociology Through Film	4	"Popular culture both reflects and influences larger trends in society. Feature-length film, as a pervasive form of media, will be used to illustrate sociological concepts and issues, with a particular focus on how films reinforce and reproduce dominant cultural themes. Possible topics include social class and the American Dream, race relations and institutional violence, corporate crime, and love, connection, and alienation in modern life. Through lecture and class discussion, students will become acquainted with the social forces and dynamics related to these and other concepts and examine how these themes are depicted in popular movies.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."752	SOC 260	Cults and New Religious Movements	4	"This course serves as an introduction to the social-scientific study of NRMs within North America.  Its main goal is to provide you with a critical understanding of major concepts and controversies surrounding NRMs.  In a more practical sense it will expose you to a survey of the relevant social-scientific research, while simultaneously introducing you to prominent examples of different types of NRMs (e.g., Heaven’s Gate, The People’s Temple, the Branch Davidians, the Unification Church, The Children of God, Aum Shinrykyo, Scientology). Prerequisties: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or any introductory sociology class."753	SOC 290	Special Topics in Sociology	1 to 4	Treatment of a special topic in Sociology. Provides student with the opportunity to investigate sociological subject matter. Students may receive credit in future semester for different topic area. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course.754	SOC 310	History of Sociological Theory	4	"Presents a historical overview of the emergence and development of sociological theory, with emphasis on theorists such as Comte, Spencer, Marx, Durkheim, Weber, Mead, and postWWII theorists.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."755	SOC 314	Sociology of Deviance	4	"Presents major sociological theories of deviance.  Examines specific forms of deviance, such as drug abuse, crime, sexual deviance, and mental illness.  Prerequisite: ANT 301 or SOC 110 or an introductory anthropology or sociology course. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."756	SOC 320	Social Policy	4	"Examines various attempts to apply social science knowledge to address social problems and bring about appropriate change in human behavior. Explores the process by which social policy is developed and implemented. Examples are taken from both the United States and other cultures. Among possible topics are social service, needs assessment, health and healing, work, education, and technological change. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."757	SOC 332	Methods of Inquiry	4	"Provides experience in the design and implementation of social science research.  Topics cover include philosophies of social science, development of theories and hypotheses, modes of observation, methods of sampling and techniques of analysis.  Students will design and implement several research projects during the semester.  Use of computers is required, though no prior experience is assumed. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."758	SOC 350	Chemical Dependencies and Human Behavior	4	"Explores sociological perspectives on the acquisition, continuation, and elimination of human dependency on chemical substances like drugs and alcohol.  Aims to bridge the gap between professional and academic skills and information.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."759	SOC 351	Sociology of Crime	4	"Introduces the study of crime and the criminal justice system. Examines the causes of crime, including violent crime, crimes against property, substance abuse, sexual offenses, white collar, and organized crime.  Considers the efforts of the police, courts, penal system, and community to deal with the various types of crime, as well as the social policy implications of our understanding of and approaches to the problem of crime.   Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."760	SOC 362	The Sociology of Terrorism	4	"The Sociology of Terrorism is a course that examines the social scientific phenomenon of terrorism, which has re-emerged as a major focus of Western political and social study in response to the 9/11 terrorist attacks.  The course will begin by taking an evolutionary approach to defining terrorism by grounding it in its historical roots and tracing its growth to contemporary forms of terrorism.  The middle section of the course is devoted to examining the “how” and the “why” behind terrorism and political violence, paying particular attention to issues surrounding the media, radicalization, and suicide terrorism.  It then concludes with an examination of how governments combat terrorist groups, how terrorist groups eventually disengage from violence and a consideration of the future of terrorism.  This course relies primarily on sociological approaches to understanding terrorism, but will at times focus on material from other disciplines, such as social psychology and political science.  The aim of the course is to introduce the student to key issues, while teaching how to cogently and critically analyze contemporary issues surrounding terrorism and political violence.  Prerequisites: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course. "761	SOC 370	Sociology of Health and Illness	4	Integrates varied sociological perspectives with the study of health and illness.  Investigates the relationship between social structure and the experience of health or illness.  Examines the organization and delivery of medical services in the United States.  Focuses on the individual’s experience of illness.  Links sociological theory and sociological practice in the healthcare arena. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course.762	SOC 380	Returning From War	4	"The problems facing veterans, as well as their families and communities, as individuals return from wart are explored here, including the experience of war, the physical and emotional consequences of war, as well as the social context in which war is waged and individuals attempt to return to their non-combat lives. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."763	SOC 410	Power and Violence in the Family	4	"Issues of power and control are part of every relationship and can lead to emotional, physical, and sexual violence.  Through lectures and class discussion the student will gain an understanding of the fundamental dynamics of abusive situations, the consequences for all concerned, and the policy implications.  (Designed specifically to meet the needs of students interested in the human services field.) Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course. "764	SOC 411	Sociology of Community	4	"Explores a range of communities, including urban, rural, suburban, and virtual.  Takes an active approach to examining problems facing communities, including poverty, crime, growth and economic revitalization, and explores ways of addressing these problems.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology or anthropology course."765	SOC 424	Social Welfare Policy	4	"Investigates the history, concepts, programs, and practices of social welfare policies in the United States.  Promotes an appreciation for the interrelatedness of practice and policy analysis in the field of social welfare scholarship.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."766	SOC 446	The Individual and Society	4	"Presents various ways to conceptualize the mutual influences of individuallevel and socialstructural processes.  Addresses specific topics within social psychology, ""human nature,"" communication and language, perception, socialization, and the acquisition of roles, ideologies, and values.   Embraces the symbolic interactionist perspective. Focuses on understanding alcoholism. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."767	SOC 450	Sociology of Corrections	4	Introduces students to correctional institutions by examining the history and philosophy of corrections; the social organization of prison societies as total institutions; the management of prisons;  prison violence and courtmandated attempts to restore civility; jails and community corrections; and critiques of traditional approaches to corrections. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course.768	SOC 452	White Collar Crime	4	"Focuses upon crime that occurs within organizational and occupational contexts.  Applies the major theories of crime causation to such illegality whether committed for the benefit of an employing organization, by individuals through the exercise of State authority, by individuals in their particular professional capacity, or for other types of individual gain.  Explores legal and social strategies for controlling these practices.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."769	SOC 453	Comparative Criminal Justice Systems	4	"Compares the American Criminal Justice System to Criminal Justice Systems of a number of other advanced industrial societies, especially in Western Europe. Focal areas include overall policy/philosophy and social organization. Special emphasis upon the alternatives to American approaches, referred to broadly as harm reduction, including decriminalization, diversion before entering the CJS, diversion after entering the CJS, effective rehabilitation, and successful re-entry. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."770	SOC 455	Sociology of Law and the Courts	4	Examines the social origins of law and the institutions by which  it is administered; the effect of law on the reproduction of social arrangements; the history of legal ideas and their influence on  legislation and court precedents; and the relation of law to the problem of social order and control.  Primary emphasis is on criminal law and courts.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course.771	SOC 465	Sociology of Occupations and Professions	4	"Presents previous and current sociological approaches to the structure of labor markets, both occupational and professional.  Analyzes changes in these markets.  Examines the relations between labor markets and other social institutions, such as the family, the school, race/ethnicity, gender, and class.  Analyzes professions as particular types of occupation, the social consequences of professionalization, and the implications of current patterns of labor market recruitment, mobility, segregation, and segmentation. Prerequisite: ANT 301 or SOC 110, or an introductory anthropology or sociology course. Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course."772	SOC 480	Social Network Analysis	4	"This seminar will provide you with an introduction to the theories and methods related to the social-scientific study of networks, as well as familiarity with the most commonly used social network analysis software: UCInet. As a result, there will be a balance between lecture classes, where core theoretical and methodological concepts related to SNA will be presented and discussed, and lab classes where you will learn hands on skills related to gathering, analyzing, and interpreting relational data.  While you will undoubtedly encounter formulae and mathematical equations throughout the duration of this course, there will be a particular emphasis on applied knowledge of social network methods.  Prerequisites: SOC 100 or SOC 110, SOC 332, STA 100."773	SOC 490	Selected Topics in Sociology	4	An in-depth treatment of a selected topic in Sociology.  Provides students with the opportunity to investigate sociological subject matter.  Students may receive credit in a future semester for different topic areas.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course.774	  			775	SOC 491	Independent Study	1 to 4	"Provides a structure for extensive study and/or directed research (under faculty supervision) on a topic. Application form must include a description of the project, its duration, its educational goals, method for its evaluation, and a suggested number of credits.  Prerequisite: SOC 100 or SOC 110 or an introductory sociology course. Matriculated students only; permission of instructor and program coordinator required."776	SOC 493	Senior Seminar in Sociology	4	Explores in depth a particular sociological topic chosen by the instructor.  Emphasizes critical analysis of current sociological literature and the development of independent projects by students. Topic varies.  Prerequisite: SOC 310 and SOC 332. Permission of instructor required.777	SOC 495	Practicum in Sociology	4	"Integrates academic and practical experience during one semester placement in an appropriate social service, criminal justice, or workrelated community setting.  Involves execution of a social practice project, negotiated among student, staff, and placement supervisor.  Students must apply for admission to the course.  Prerequisites:  Completion of at least 2 Sociology/Anthropology courses at this campus prior to the start of this class and a 3.0 GPA and permission of instructor."778	Spanish			779	SPA 101	Elementary Spanish	4	"Designed to give the beginning student an awareness of how members of another culture communicate and live.  Student achieves this by using language skill of listening, speaking, reading, and writing.  The process entails study of pronunciation, basic grammar, selected vocabulary, and the culture that the language represents. Meets the new General Education Foreign Language requirement."780	SPA 102	Intermediate Spanish	4	"Refines the skills learned in an introductory Spanish class in oral comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. The course instruction will be primarily in Spanish.   Meets the new General Education Foreign Language requirement. Prerequisite: SPA 101. "781	Statistics			782	STA 100	Statistical Methods	4	"Study of the methods whereby data are collected, analyzed, and presented.  Topics include: frequency distributions, measures of location, dispersion, and skewness, probability and probability distributions, and various topics in statistical inference. Class incorporates data analysis software. Meets the new General Education Mathematics requirement."783	STA 225	Applied Statistical Analysis	4	"This course deals indepth with statistical methods used to analyze data.  Applications are drawn from many diverse areas.  Topics include: measures of location and scale for frequency distributions, addition and multiplication laws for probability, binomial, Poisson, and normal distributions, inferences about proportions and location parameters in onesample and twosample problems, analysis of completely randomized and randomized blocks designs, simple linear regression and correlation, sign test, median test, rank sum test, and signed rank test. Prerequisites:  MAT 112, or MAT 121 or MAT 152."784	STA 290	Topics in Statistics	1 to 4	An introductory course in selected topics in Statistics not currently covered in any of the listed classes. Topics are chosen to illustrate different fields and applications which are all part of Statistics. 785	STA 410	Applied Regression Analysis	4	Many students in engineering and the physical sciences require a continuation and further development of statistical inference within the context of linear models. Basic statistical concepts are briefly reviewed and the ordinary least squares (OLS) approach developed. Multiple regression analysis is developed with an emphasis on model specification and assessment of model assumptions. Analysis of Covariance models are developed and studied. Matrix representations are also developed and allow a more rigorous approach. A computational environment for simulation and data analysis (for example SPSS or R) is integrated throughout the course. 786	Theater			787	THR 300	Theater Production	4	"A balance between academics and studio work.  Students will learn about theatre history and production as well as actively participate in the mounting of a theatrical work.  Using the varied talents of the class, we will select polished scenes, a one act play, a full length play, or an interactive educational play about current issues.  The production may be a public performance or merely in-class final design and performance presentations.  If a public performance, members of the class will provide the artistic and technical staffing of the production, under the overall guidance of the class instructor.  Additional assistance may be provided by student volunteers not enrolled for credit.  Because theatre is an art which draws upon many areas of skill and intelligence, some reflective work will be done to document each student’s personal journey.  There will be some class visits to areas theaters and/or productions as these opportunities become available. Meets new General Education Arts requirement."